“Considering that I’m a historian? Of course Hari.”
“Ah but like this one?”
He handed over the Book and Dors smiling opened it-then turned to another page-then flipped the pages. “Its blank ” she said.
“It appears to be blank. The Mycogenians are stubbornly primitivistic but not entirely so. They will keep to the essence of the primitive but have no objection to using modern technology to modify it for convenience’s sake. Who knows?”
“Maybe so Hari but I don’t understand what you’re saying.”
“The pages aren’t blank they’re covered with microprint. Here give it back. If I press this little nubbin on the inner edge of the cover- Look!”
The page to which the book lay open was suddenly covered with lines of print that rolled slowly upward.
Seldon said “You can adjust the rate of upward movement to match your reading speed by slightly twisting the nubbin one way or the other.
 When the lines of print reach their upward limit when you reach the bottom line that is-they snap downward and turn off. You turn to the next page and continue.”
“Where does the energy come from that does all this?”
“It has an enclosed microfusion battery that lasts the life of the book.”
“Then when it runs down“
“You discard the book which you may be required to do even before it runs down given wear and tear and get another copy. You never replace the battery.”
Dors took the Book a second time and looked at it from all sides. She said “I must admit I never heard of a book like this.”
“Nor I. The Galaxy generally has moved into visual technology so rapidly it skipped over this possibility.”
“This is visual.”
“Yes but not with the orthodox effects. This type of book has its advantages. It holds far more than an ordinary visual book does.”
Dors said “Where’s the turn-on? -Ah let me see if I can work it.” She had opened to a page at random and set the lines of print marching upward.
 Then she said “I’m afraid this won’t do you any good Hari. It’s pre-Galactic. I don’t mean the book.
 I mean the print . . . the language.”
“Can you read it Dors? As a historian“
“As a historian I’m used to dealing with archaic languagebut within limits. This is far too ancient for me. I ran make out a few words here and there but not enough to be useful.”
“Good ” said Seldon. “If it’s really ancient it will be useful.”
“Not if you can’t read it.”
“I can read it ” said Seldon. “It’s bilingual. You don’t suppose that Raindrop Forty-Three can read the ancient script do you?”
“If she’s educated properly why not?”
“Because I suspect that women in Mycogen are not educated past household duties. Some of the more learned men can read this but everyone else would need a translation to Galactic.
” He pushed another nubbin. “And this supplies it.”
The lines of print changed to Galactic Standard.
“Delightful ” said Dors in admiration.
“We could learn from these Mycogenians but we don’t.”
“We haven’t known about it.”
“I can’t believe that. I know about it now. And you know about it. There must be outsiders coming into Mycogen now and then for commercial or political reasons or there wouldn’
t be skincaps so ready for use. So every once in a while someone must have caught a glimpse of this sort of print-book and seen how it works but it’
s probably dismissed as something curious but not worth further study simply because it’s Mycogenian.”
“But is it worth study?”
“Of course. Everything is. Or should be. Hummin would probably point to this lack of concern about these books as a sign of degeneration in the Empire.”
He lifted the Book and said with a gush of excitement “But I am curious and I will read this and it may push me in the direction of psychohistory.”
“I hope so ” said Dors “but if you take my advice you’ll sleep first and approach it fresh in the morning. You won’
t learn much if you nod over it.”
Seldon hesitated then said “How maternal you are!”
“I’m watching over you.”
“But I have a mother alive on Helicon. I would rather you were my friend.”
“As for that I have been your friend since first I met you.”
She smiled at him and Seldon hesitated as though he were not certain as to the appropriate rejoinder. Finally he said “Then I’ll take your adviceas a friendand sleep before reading.”
He made as though to put the Book on a small table between the two cots hesitated turned and put it under his pillow.
Dors Venabili laughed softly. “I think you’re afraid I will wake during the night and read parts of the Book before you have a chance to. Is that it?”
“Well ” said Seldon trying not to look ashamed “that may be it. Even friendship only goes so far and this is my book and it’s my psychohistory.”
“I agree ” said Dors “and I promise you that we won’t quarrel over that. By the way you were about to say something earlier when I interrupted you. Remember?”
Seldon thought briefly. “No.”
In the dark he thought only of the Book. He gave no thought to the hand-on-thigh story. In fact he had already quite forgotten it consciously at least.
Venabili woke up and could tell by her timeband that the night period was only half over. Not hearing Hari’s snore she could tell that his cot was empty.
 If he had not left the apartment then he was in the bathroom.
She tapped lightly on the door and said softly “Hari?”
He said “Come in ” in an abstracted way and she did.
The toilet lid was down and Seldon seated upon it held the Book open on his lap. He said quite unnecessarily “I’m reading.”
“Yes I see that. But why?”
“I couldn’t sleep. I’m sorry.”
“But why read in here?”
“If I had turned on the room light I would have woken you up.”
“Are you sure the Book can’t be illuminated?”
“Pretty sure. When Raindrop Forty-Three described its workings she never mentioned illumination. Besides I suppose that would use up so much energy that the battery wouldn’
t last the life of the Book.” He sounded dissatisfied.
Dors said “You can step out then. I want to use this place as long as I’m here.”
When she emerged she found him sitting cross-legged on his cot still reading with the room well lighted.
She said “You don’t look happy. Does the Book disappoint you?”
He looked up at her blinking. “Yes it does. I’ve sampled it here and there. Its all I’ve had time to do.
 The thing is a virtual encyclopedia and the index is almost entirely a listing of people and places that are of little use for my purposes.
 It has nothing to do with the Galactic Empire or the pre-Imperial Kingdoms either. It deals almost entirely with a single world and as nearly as I can make out from what I have read it is an endless dissertation on internal politics.”
“Perhaps you underestimate its age. It may deal with a period when there was indeed only one world . . . one inhabited world.”
“Yes I know ” said Seldon a little impatiently. “That’s actually what I want-provided I can be sure its history not legend.
 I wonder. I don’t want to believe it just because I want to believe it.”
Dors said “Well this matter of a single-world origin is much in the air these days. Human beings are a single species spread all over the Galaxy so they must have originated somewhere.
 At least that’s the popular view at present. You can’t have independent origins producing the same species on different worlds.”
“But I’ve never seen the inevitability of that argument ” said Seldon. “If human beings arose on a number of worlds as a number of different species why couldn’
t they have interbred into some single intermediate species?”
“Because species can’t interbreed. That’s what makes them species.”
Seldon thought about it a moment then dismissed it with a shrug. “Well I’ll leave it to the biologists.”
“They’re precisely the ones who are keenest on the Earth hypothesis.”
“Earth? Is that what they call the supposed world of origin?”
“That’s a popular name for it though there’s no way of telling what it was called assuming there was one. And no one has any clue to what its location might be.”
“Earth!” said Seldon curling his lips. “It sounds like a belch to me. In any case if the book deals with the original world I didn’
t come across it. How do you spell the word?”
She told him and he checked the Book quickly. “There you are. The name is not listed in the index either by that spelling or any reasonable alternative.”
“Really?”
“And they do mention other worlds in passing. Names aren’t given and there seems no interest in those other worlds except insofar as they directly impinge on the local world they speak of .
 . . at least as far as I can see from what I’ve read. In one place they talked about ‘The Fifty.’ I don’
t know what they meant. Fifty leaders? Fifty cities? It seemed to me to be fifty worlds.”
“Did they give a name to their own world this world that seems to preoccupy them entirely?” asked Dors. “If they don’t call it Earth what do they call it?”
“As you’d expect they call it ‘the world’ or ‘the planet.’ Sometimes they call it ‘the Oldest’ or ‘The World of the Dawn ‘ which has a poetic significance I presume that isn’
t clear to me. I suppose one ought to read the Book entirely through and some matters will then grow to make more sense.” He looked down at the Book in his hand with some distaste.
 “It would take a very long time though and I’m not sure that I’d end up any the wiser.”
Dors sighed. “I’m sorry Hari. You sound so disappointed.”
“That’s because I am disappointed. It’s my fault though. I should not have allowed myself to expect too much. -At one point come to think of it they referred to their world as ‘Aurora.’ “
“Aurora?” said Dors lifting her eyebrows.
“It sounds like a proper name. It doesn’t make any sense otherwise as far as I can see. Does it mean anything to you Dors?”
“Aurora.” Dors thought about it with a slight frown on her fare. “I can’t say I’ve ever heard of a planet with that name in the course of the history of the Galactic Empire or during the period of its growth for that matter but I won’
t pretend to know the name of every one of the twenty five million worlds. We could look it up in the University library-if we ever get back to Streeling.
 There’s no use trying to find a library here in Mycogen. Somehow I have a feeling that all their knowledge is in the Book.
 If anything isn’t there they aren’t interested.”
Seldon yawned and said “I think you’re right. In any case there’s no use reading any more and I doubt that I can keep my eyes open any longer.
 Is it all right if I put out the light?”
“I would welcome it Hari. And let’s sleep a little later in the morning.”
Then in the dark Seldon said softly “Of course some of what they say is ridiculous. For instance they refer to a life expectancy on their world of between three and four centuries.”
“Centuries?”
“Yes they count their ages by decades rather than by years. It gives you a queer feeling because so much of what they say is perfectly matter-of-fact that when they come out with something that odd you almost find yourself trapped into believing it.”
“If you feel yourself beginning to believe that then you should realize that many legends of primitive origins assume extended life spans for early leaders.
 If they’re pictured as unbelievably heroic you see it seems natural that they have life spans to suit.”
“Is that so?” said Seldon yawning again.
“It is. And the cure for advanced gullibility is to go to sleep and consider matters again the next day.”
And Seldon pausing only long enough to think that an extended life span might well be a simple necessity for anyone trying to understand a Galaxy of people slept.
The next morning feeling relaxed and refreshed and eager to begin his study of the Book again Hari asked Dors “How old would you say the Raindrop sisters are?”
“I don’t know. Twenty . . . twenty-two?”
“Well suppose they do live three or four centuries
“Hari. That’s ridiculous.”
“I’m saying suppose. In mathematics we say ’suppose’ all the time and see if we can end up with something patently untrue or selfcontradictory.
 An extended life span would almost surely mean an extended period of development. They might seem in their early twenties and actually be in their sixties.”
“You can try asking them how old they are.”
“We can assume they’d lie.”
“Look up their birth certificates.”
Seldon smiled wryly. “I’ll bet you anything you like-a roll in the hay if you’re willing-that they’ll claim they don’
t keep records or that if they do they will insist those records are closed to tribespeople.”
“No bet ” said Dors. “And if that’s true then it’s useless trying to suppose anything about their age.”
“Oh no. Think of it this way. If the Mycogenians are living extended life spans that are four or five times that of ordinary human beings they can’
t very well give birth to very many children without expanding their population tremendously. You remember that Sunmaster said something about not having the population expand and bit off his remarks angrily at that time.”
Dors said “What are you getting at?”
“When I was with Raindrop Forty-Three I saw no children.”
“On the microfarms?”
‘Yes.’
“Did you expect children there? I was with Raindrop Forty-Five in the shops and on the residential levels and I assure you I saw a number of children of all ages including infants. Quite a few of them.”
“Ah.” Seldon looked chagrined. “Then that would mean they can’t be enjoying extended life spans.”
Dors said “By your line of argument I should say definitely not. Did you really think they did?”
“No not really. But then you can’t close your mind either and make assumptions without testing them one way or another.”
“You can waste a lot of time that way too if you stop to chew away at things that are ridiculous on the face of it.”
“Some things that seem ridiculous on the face of it aren’t. That’s all. Which reminds me. You’re the historian. In your work have you ever come across objects or phenomena called ‘robots’?”
“Ah! Now you’re switching to another legend and a very popular one. There are any number of worlds that imagine the existence of machines in human form in prehistoric times. These are called ‘robots.’
“The tales of robots probably originate from one master legend for the general theme is the same. Robots were devised then grew in numbers and abilities to the status of the almost superhuman.
 They threatened humanity and were destroyed. In every case the destruction took place before the actual reliable historic records available to us today existed. The usual feeling is that the story is a symbolic picture of the risks and dangers of exploring the Galaxy when human beings expanded outward from the world or worlds that were their original homes.
 There must always have been the fear of encountering otherand superior-intelligences.”
“Perhaps they did at least once and that gave rise to the legend.”
“Except that on no human-occupied world has there been any record or trace of any prehuman or nonhuman intelligence.”
“But why ‘robots’? Does the word have meaning?”
“Not that I know of but it’s the equivalent of the familiar ‘automata.’ “
“Automata! Well why don’t they say so?”
“Because people do use archaic terms for flavor when they tell an ancient legend. Why do you ask all this by the way?”
“Because in this ancient Mycogenian book they talk of robots. And very favorably by the way. -Listen Dors aren’t you going out with Raindrop Forty-Five again this afternoon?”
“Supposedly-if she shows up.”
“Would you ask her some questions and try to get the answers out of her?”
“I can try. What are the questions?”
“I would like to find out as tactfully as possible if there is some structure in Mycogen that is particularly significant that is tied in with the past that has a sort of mythic value that can“
Dors interrupted trying not to smile. “I think that what you are trying to ask is whether Mycogen has a temple.”
And inevitably Seldon looked blank and said “What’s a temple?”
“Another archaic term of uncertain origin. It means all the things you asked about-significance past myth. Very well I’ll ask. It’s the sort of thing however that they might find difficult to speak of. To tribespeople certainly.”
“Nevertheless do try.”
Sacratorium
AURORA- . . . A mythical world supposedly inhabited in primordial times during the dawn of interstellar travel. It is thought by some to he the perhaps equally mythical “world of origin”
 of humanity and to be another name for “Earth.” The people of the Mycogen (q.v.) Sector of ancient Trantor reportedly held themselves to be descended from the inhabitants of Aurora and made that tenet central to their system of beliefs concerning which almost nothing else is known . . .
ENCYCLOPEDIA GALACTICA
The two Raindrops arrived at midmorning. Raindrop Forty-Five seemed as cheerful as ever but Raindrop Forty-Three paused just inside the door looking drawn and circumspect.
 She kept her eyes down and did not as much as glance at Seldon.
Seldon looked uncertain and gestured to Dors who said in a cheerful businesslike tone of voice “One moment Sisters. I must give instructions to my man or he won’
t know what to do with himself today.”
They moved into the bathroom and Dors whispered “Is something wrong?”
“Yes. Raindrop Forty-Three is obviously shattered. Please tell her that I will return the Book as soon as possible.”
Dors favored Seldon with a long surprised look. “Hari ” she said “you’re a sweet caring person but you haven’t the good sense of an amoeba.
 If I as much as mention the Book to the poor woman she’ll be certain that you told me all about what happened yesterday and then she’
ll really be shattered. The only hope is to treat her exactly as I would ordinarily.”
Seldon nodded his head and said dispiritedly “I suppose you’re right.”
Dors returned in time for dinner and found Seldon on his cot still leafing through the Book but with intensified impatience.
He looked up with a scowl and said “If we’re going to be staying here any length of time we’re going to need a communication device of some sort between us.
 I had no idea when you’d get back and I was a little concerned.”
“Well here I am ” she said removing her skincap gingerly and looking at it with more than a little distaste. “I’m really pleased at your concern.
 I rather thought you’d be so lost in the Book you wouldn’t even realize I was gone.”
Seldon snorted.
Dors said “As for communications devices I doubt that they are easy to come by in Mycogen. It would mean easing communication with tribespeople outside and I suspect the leaders of Mycogen are bound and determined to cut down on any possible interaction with the great beyond.”
“Yes ” said Seldon tossing the Book to one side “I would expect that from what I see in the Book. Did you find out about the whatever you called it . . . the temple?”
“Yes ” she said removing her eyebrow patches. “It exists. There are a number of them over the area of the sector but there’
s a central building that seems to be the important one. -Would you believe that one woman noticed my eyelashes and told me that I shouldn’
t let myself be seen in public? I have a feeling she intended to report me for indecent exposure.”
“Never mind that ” said Seldon impatiently. “Do you know where the central temple is located?”
“I have directions but Raindrop Forty-Five warned me that women were not allowed inside except on special occasions none of which are coming up soon. It’s called the Sacratorium.”
“The what.”
“The Sacratorium.”
“What an ugly word. What does it mean?”
Dors shook her head. “It’s new to me. And neither Raindrop knew what it meant either. To them Sacratorium isn’t what the building is called it’
s what it is. Asking them why they called it that probably sounded like asking them why a wall is called a wall.”
“Is there anything about it they do know?”
“Of course Hari. They know what it’s for. It’s a place that’s devoted to something other than the life here in Mycogen.
 It’s devoted to another world a former and better one.”
“The world they once lived on you mean?”
“Exactly. Raindrop Forty-Five all but said so but not quite. She couldn’t bring herself to say the word.”
“Aurora?”
“That’s the word but I suspect that if you were to say it out loud to a group of Mycogenians they would be shocked and horrified.
 Raindrop Forty-Five when she said ‘The Sacratorium is dedicated to-’ stopped at that point and carefully wrote out the letters one by one with her finger on the palm of her hand.
 And she blushed as though she was doing something obscene.”
“Strange ” said Seldon. “If the Book is an accurate guide Aurora is their dearest memory their chief point of unification the center about which everything in Mycogen revolves.
 Why should its mention be considered obscene? -Are you sure you didn’t misinterpret what the Sister meant?”
“I’m positive. And perhaps it’s no mystery. Too much talk about it would get to tribespeople. The best way of keeping it secret unto themselves is to make its very mention taboo.”
“Taboo?”
“A specialized anthropological term. It’s a reference to serious and effective social pressure forbidding some sort of action. The fact that women are not allowed in the Sacratorium probably has the force of a taboo.
 I’m sure that a Sister would be horrified if it was suggested that she invade its precincts.”
“Are the directions you have good enough for me to get to the Sacratorium on my own?”
“In the first place Hari you’re not going alone. I’m going with you. I thought we had discussed the matter and that I had made it clear that I cannot protect you at long distance-not from sleet storms and not from feral women.
 In the second place it’s impractical to think of walking there. Mycogen may be a small sector as sectors go but it simply isn’t that small.”
“An Expressway then.”
“There are no Expressways passing through Mycogenian territory. It would make contact between Mycogenians and tribespeople too easy. Still there are public conveyances of the kind that are found on less developed planets.
 In fact that’s what Mycogen is a piece of an undeveloped planet embedded like a splinter in the body of Trantor which is otherwise a patchwork of developed societies.
 and Hari finish with the Book as soon as possible. It’s apparent that Rainbow Forty-Three is in trouble as long as you have it and so will we be if they find out.”
“Do you mean a tribesperson reading it is taboo?”
“I’m sure of it.”
“Well it would be no great loss to give it back. I should say that 95 percent of it is incredibly dull; endless in-fighting among political groups endless justification of policies whose wisdom I cannot possibly judge endless homilies on ethical matters which even when enlightened and they usually aren’
t are couched with such infuriating self-righteousness as to almost enforce violation.”
“You sound as though I would be doing you a great favor it I took the thing away from you.”
“Except that there’s always the other 5 percent that discusses the never-to-be-mentioned Aurora. I keep thinking that there may be something there and that it may be helpful to me.
 That’s why I wanted to know about the Sacratorium.
“Do you hope to find support for the Book’s concept of Aurora in the Sacratorium?”
“In a way. And I’m also terribly caught up in what the Book has to say about automata or robots to use their term.
 I find myself attracted to the concept.”
“Surely you don’t take it seriously?”
“Almost. If you accept some passages of the Book literally then there is an implication that some robots were in human shape.”
“Naturally. If you’re going to construct a simulacrum of a human being you will make it look like a human being.”
“Yes simulacrum means ‘likeness ‘ but a likeness can be crude indeed. An artist can draw a stick figure and you might know he is representing a human being and recognize it.
 A circle for the head a stalk for the body and four bent lines for arms and legs and you have it. But I mean robots that really look like a human being in every detail.”
“Ridiculous Hari. Imagine the time it would take to fashion the metal of the body into perfect proportions with the smooth curve of underlying muscles.”
“Who said ‘metal ‘ Dors? The impression I got is that such robots were organic or pseudo-organic that they were covered with skin that you could not easily draw a distinction between them and human beings in any way.”
“Does the Book say that?”
“Not in so many words. The inference however“
“Is your inference Hari. You can’t take it seriously.”
“Let me try. I find four things that I can deduce from what the Book says about robotsand I followed up every reference the index gave.
 First as I say theyor some of them-exactly resembled human beings; second they had very extended life spans-if you want to call it that.”
“Better say ‘effectiveness ‘ ” said Dors “or you’ll begin thinking of them as human altogether.”
“Third ” said Seldon ignoring her “that someor at any rate at least one-continues to live on to this day.”
“Hart’ that’s one of the most widespread legends we have. The ancient hero does not die but remains in suspended animation ready to return to save his people at some time of great need. Really Hari.”
“Fourth ” said Seldon still not rising to the bait “there are some lines that seem to indicate that the central templeor the Sacratorium if that’
s what it is though I haven’t found that word in the Book actually contains a robot.” He paused then said “Do you see?”
Dors said “No. What should I see?”
“If we combine the four points perhaps a robot that looks exactly like a human being and that is still alive having been alive for say the last twenty thousand years is in the Sacratorium.”
“Come on Hari you can’t believe that.”
“I don’t actually believe it but I can’t entirely let go either. What if its true? What if-its only one chance out of a million I admit it’
s true? Don’t you see how useful he could be to me? He could remember the Galaxy as it was long before any reliable historical records existed. He might help make psychohistory possible.”
“Even if it was true do you suppose the Mycogenians would let you see and interview the robot?”
“I don’t intend to ask permission. I can at least go to the Sacratorium and see if there’s something to interview first.”
“Not now. Tomorrow at the earliest. And if you don’t think better of it by morning we go.”
“You told me yourself they don’t allow women“
“They allow women to look at it from outside I’m sure and I suspect that is all we’ll get to do.”
And there she was adamant.
Hari Seldon was perfectly willing to let Dors take the lead. She had been out in the main roadways of Mycogen and was more at home with them than he was.
Dors Venabili brows knitted was less delighted with the prospect. She said “We can easily get lost you know.”
“Not with that booklet ” said Seldon.
She looked up at him impatiently. “Fix your mind on Mycogen Hari. What I should have is a computomap something I can ask questions of.
 This Mycogenian version is just a piece of folded plastic. I can’t tell this thing where I am. I can’t tell it by word of mouth and I can’
t even tell it by pushing the necessary contacts. It can’t tell me anything either way. It’s a print thing.”
“Then read what it says.”
“That’s what I’m trying to do but it’s written for people who are familiar with the system to begin with. We’ll have to ask.”
“No Dors. That would be a last resort. I don’t want to attract attention. I would rather we take our chances and try to find our own way even if it means making one or two wrong turns.”
Dors leafed through the booklet with great attention and then said grudgingly “Well it gives the Sacratorium important mention. I suppose that’s only natural.
 I presume everyone in Mycogen would want to get there at one time or another.” Then after additional concentration she said “I’ll tell you what.
 There’s no way of taking a conveyance from here to there.”
“What?”
“Don’t get excited. Apparently there’s a way of getting from here to another conveyance that will take us there. We’ll have to change from one to another.”
Seldon relaxed. “Well of course. You can’t take an Expressway to half the places on Trantor without changing.”
Dors cast an impatient glance at Seldon. “I know that too. It’s just that I’m used to having these things tell me so.
 When they expect you to find out for yourself the simplest things can escape you for a while.”
“All right dear. Don’t snap. If you know the way now lead. I will follow humbly.”
And follow her he did until they came to an intersection where they stopped.
Three white-kirtled males and a pair of gray-kirtled females were at the same intersection. Seldon tried a universal and general smile in their direction but they responded with a blank stare and looked away.
And then the conveyance came. It was an outmoded version of what Seldon back on Helicon would have called a gravi-bus. There were some twenty upholstered benches inside each capable of holding four people.
 Each bench had its own doors on both sides of the bus. When it stopped passengers emerged on either side. (For a moment Seldon was concerned for those who got out on the traffic side of the gravi-bus but then he noticed that every vehicle approaching from either direction stopped as it neared the bus.
 None passed it while it was not moving.)
Dors pushed Seldon impatiently and he moved on to a bench where two adjoining seats were available. Dors followed after. (The men always got on and got off first he noticed.)
“Well try.”
“For instance ” she said and pointed to a smooth boxed-off area on the back of the bench directly before each of them. As soon as the conveyance had begun to move words lit up naming the next stop and the notable structures or crossways that were nearby.
“Now that will probably tell us when we’re approaching the changeover we want. At least the sector isn’t completely barbaric.”
“Good ” said Seldon. Then after a while leaning toward Dors he whispered “No one is looking at us. It seems that artificial boundaries are set up to preserve individual privacy in any crowded place. Have you noticed that?”
“I’ve always taken it for granted. If that’s going to be a rule of your psychohistory no one will be very impressed by it.”
As Dors had guessed the direction plaque in front of them eventually announced the approach to the changeover for the direct line to the Sacratorium.
They exited and again had to wait. Some buses ahead had already left this intersection but another gravi-bus was already approaching. They were on a well-traveled route which was not surprising;
 the Sacratorium was bound to be the center and heartbeat of the sector.
They got on the gravi-bus and Seldon whispered “We’re not paying.”
“According to the map public transportation is a free service.”
Seldon thrust out his lower lip. “How civilized. I suppose that nothing is all of a piece not backwardness not barbarism nothing.”
But Dors nudged him and whispered “Your rule is broken. We’re being watched. The man on your right.”
52.
Seldon’s eyes shifted briefly. The man to his right was rather thin and seemed quite old. He had dark brown eyes and a swarthy complexion and Seldon was sure that he would have had black hair if he had not been depilated.
He faced front again thinking. This Brother was rather atypical. The few Brothers he had paid any attention to had been rather tall lightskinned and with blue or gray eyes.
 Of course he had not seen enough of them to make a general rule.
Then there was a light touch on the right sleeve of his kirtle. Seldon turned hesitantly and found himself looking at a card on which was written lightly CAREFUL TRIBESMAN!
Seldon started and put a hand to his skincap automatically. The man next to him silently mouthed “Hair.”
Seldon’s hand found it a tiny exposure of bristles at his temple. He must have disturbed the skincap at some point or another. Quickly and as unobtrusively as possible he tugged the skincap then made sure that it was snug under the pretence of stroking his head.
He turned to his neighbor on his right nodded slightly and mouthed “Thank you.”
His neighbor smiled and said in a normal speaking voice “Going to the Sacratorium?”
Seldon nodded. “Yes I am.”
“Easy guess. So am I. Shall we get off together?” His smile was friendly.
“I’m with my-my“
“With your woman. Of course. All three together then?”
Seldon was not sure how to react. A quick look in the other direction showed him that Dors’s eyes were turned straight ahead. She was showing no interest in masculine conversation-an attitude appropriate for a Sister.
 However Seldon felt a soft pat on his left knee which he took (with perhaps little justification) to mean: “It’s all right.”
In any case his natural sense of courtesy was on that side and he said “Yes certainly.”
There was no further conversation until the direction plaque told them they were arriving at the Sacratorium and Seldon’s Mycogenian friend was rising to get off.
The gravi-bus made a wide turn about the perimeter of a large area of the Sacratorium grounds and there was a general exodus when it came to a halt the men sliding in front of the women to exit first. The women followed.
The Mycogenian’s voice crackled a bit with age but it was cheerful. He said “It’s a little early for lunch my . .
 . friends but take my word for it that things will be crowded in not too long a time. Would you be willing to buy something simple now and eat it outside?
 I am very familiar with this area and I know a good place.”
Seldon wondered if this was a device to maneuver innocent tribespeople into something or other disreputable or costly yet decided to chance it.
“You’re very kind ” he said. “Since we are not at all familiar with the place we will be glad to let you take the lead.”
They bought lunch-sandwiches and a beverage that looked like milkat an open-air stand. Since it was a beautiful day and they were visitors the old Mycogenian said they would go to the Sacratorium grounds and eat out of doors the better to become acquainted with their surroundings.
During their walk carrying their lunch Seldon noted that on a very small scale the Sacratorium resembled the Imperial Palace and that the grounds around it resembled on a minute scale the Imperial grounds.
 He could scarcely believe that the Mycogenian people admired the Imperial institution or indeed did anything but hate and despise it yet the cultural attraction was apparently not to be withstood.
“It’s beautiful ” said the Mycogenian with obvious pride.
“Quite ” said Seldon. “How it glistens in the daylight.”
“The grounds around it ” he said “are constructed in imitation of the government grounds on our Dawn World . . . in miniature to be sure.”
“Did you ever see the grounds of the Imperial Palace?” asked Seldon cautiously.
The Mycogenian caught the implication and seemed in no way put out by it. “They Copied the Dawn World as best they could too.”
Seldon doubted that in the extreme but he said nothing.
They came to a semicircular seat of white stonite sparkling in the light as the Sacratorium did.
“Good ” said the Mycogenian his dark eyes gleaming with pleasure. “No one’s taken my place. I call it mine only because it’
s my favorite seat. It affords a beautiful view of the side wall of the Sacratorium past the trees. Please sit down. It’s not cold I assure you.
 And your companion. She is welcome to sit too. She is a tribeswoman I know and has different customs. She . . . she may speak if she wishes.”
Dors gave him a hard look and sat down.
Seldon recognizing the fact that they might remain with this old Mycogenian a while thrust out his hand and said “I am Hari and my female companion is Dors.
 We don’t use numbers I’m afraid.”
“To each his . . . or her . . . own ” said the other expansively. “I am Mycelium Seventy-Two. We are a large cohort.”
“Mycelium?” said Seldon a bit hesitantly.
“You seem surprised ” said Mycelium. “I take it then you’ve only met members of our Elder families. Names like Cloud and Sunshine and Starlight-all astronomical.”
“I must admit” began Seldon.
“Well meet one of the lower classes. We take our names from the ground and from the micro-organisms we grow. Perfectly respectable.”
“I’m quite certain ” said Seldon “and thank you again for helping me with my . . . problem in the gravi-bus.”
“Listen ” said Mycelium Seventy-Two “I saved you a lot of trouble. If a Sister had seen you before I did she would undoubtedly have screamed and the nearest Brothers would have bustled you off the bus maybe not even waiting for it to stop moving.”
Dors leaned forward so as to see across Seldon. “How is it you did not act in this way yourself?”
“I? I have no animosity against tribespeople. I’m a scholar.”
“A scholar?”
“First one in my cohort. I studied at the Sacratorium School and did very well. I’m learned in all the ancient arts and I have a license to enter the tribal library where they keep book-films and books by tribespeople.
 I can view any book-film or read any book I wish to. We even have a computerized reference library and I can handle that too.
 That sort of thing broadens your mind. I don’t mind a little hair showing. I’ve seen pictures of men with hair many a time.
 And women too.” He glanced quickly at Dors.
They ate in silence for a while and then Seldon said “I notice that every Brother who enters or leaves the Sacratorium is wearing a red sash.”
“Oh yes ” said Mycelium Seventy-Two. “Over the left shoulder and around the right side of the waist-usually very fancily embroidered.”
“Why is that?”
“It’s called an ‘obiah.’ It symbolizes the joy felt at entering the Sacratorium and the blood one would spill to preserve it.”
“Blood?” said Dors frowning.
“Just a symbol. I never actually heard of anyone spilling blood over the Sacratorium. For that matter there isn’t that much joy. it’
s mostly wailing and mourning and prostrating one’s self over the Lost World.” His voice dropped and became soft. “Very silly.”
Dors said “You’re not a . . . a believer?”
“I’m a scholar ” said Mycelium with obvious pride. His face wrinkled as he grinned and took on an even more pronounced appearance of age.
 Seldon found himself wondering how old the man was. Several centuries? -No they’d disposed of that. It couldn’t be and yet
“How old are you?” Seldon asked suddenly involuntarily.
Mycelium Seventy-Two showed no signs of taking offense at the question nor did he display any hesitation at answering “Sixtyseven.”
Seldon had to know. “I was told that your people believe that in very early times everyone lived for several centuries.”
Mycelium Seventy-Two looked at Seldon quizzically. “Now how did you find that out? Someone must have been talking out of turn  but its true.
 There is that belief. Only the unsophisticated believe it but the Elders encourage it because it shows our superiority. Actually our life expectancy is higher than elsewhere because we eat more nutritionally but living even one century is rare.”
“I take it you don’t consider Mycogenians superior ” said Seldon.
Mycelium Seventy-Two said “There’s nothing wrong with Mycogenians. They’re certainly not inferior. Still I think that all men are equal. -Even women ” he added looking across at Dors.
“I don’t suppose ” said Seldon “that many of your people would agree with that.”
“Or many of your people ” said Mycelium Seventy-Two with a faint resentment. “I believe it though. A scholar has to. I’
ve viewed and even read all the great literature of the tribespeople. I understand your culture. I’ve written articles on it. I can sit here just as comfortably with you as though you were . . . tit. “
Dors said a little sharply “You sound proud of understanding tribespeople’s ways. Have you ever traveled outside Mycogen?”
Mycelium Seventy-Two seemed to move away a little. “No.”
“Why not? You would get to know us better.”
“I wouldn’t feel right. I’d have to wear a wig. I’d be ashamed.”
Dors said “Why a wig? You could stay bald.”
“No ” said Mycelium Seventy-Two “I wouldn’t be that kind of fool. I’d be mistreated by all the hairy ones.”
“Mistreated? Why?” said Dors. “We have a great many naturally bald people everywhere on Trantor and on every other world too.”
“My father is quite bald ” said Seldon with a sigh “and I presume that in the decades to come I will be bald too.
 My hair isn’t all that thick now.”
“That’s not bald ” said Mycelium Seventy-Two. “You keep hair around the edges and over your eyes. I mean bald-no hair at all.”
“Anywhere on your body?” said Dors interested.
And now Mycelium Seventy-Two looked offended and said nothing.
Seldon anxious to get the conversation back on track said “Tell me Mycelium Seventy-Two can tribespeople enter the Sacratorium as spectators?”
Mycelium Seventy-Two shook his head vigorously. “Never. It’s for the Sons of the Dawn only.”
Dors said “Only the Sons?”
Mycelium Seventy-Two looked shocked for a moment then said forgivingly “Well you’re tribespeople. Daughters of the Dawn enter only on certain days and times.
 That’s just the way it is. I don’t say I approve. If it was up to me I’d say ‘Go in.
 Enjoy if you can.’ Sooner others than me in fact.”
“Don’t you ever go in?”
“When I was young my parents took me buthe shook his head“it was just people staring at the Book and reading from it and sighing and weeping for the old days.
 It’s very depressing. You can’t talk to each other. You can’t laugh. You can’t even look at each other. Your mind has to be totally on the Lost World.
 Totally.” He waved a hand in rejection. “Not for me. I’m a scholar and I want the whole world open to me.”
“Good ” said Seldon seeing an opening. “We feel that way too. We are scholars also Dors and myself.”
“I know ” said Mycelium Seventy-Two.
“You know? How do you know?”
“You’d have to be. The only tribespeople allowed in Mycogen are Imperial officials and diplomats important traders and scholars and to me you have the look of scholars.
 That’s what interested me in you. Scholars together.” He smiled delightedly.
“So we are. I am a mathematician. Dors is a historian. And you?”
“I specialize in . . . culture. I’ve read all the great works of literature of the tribespeople: Lissauer Mentone Novigor“
“And we have read the great works of your people. I’ve read the Book for instance. -About the Lost World.”
Mycelium Seventy-Two’s eyes opened wide in surprise. His olive complexion seemed to fade a little. “You have? How? Where?”
“At our University we have copies that we can read if we have permission.”
“Copies of the Book?”
‘Yes.’
“I wonder if the Elders know this?”
Seldon said “And I’ve read about robots.”
“Robots?”
“Yes. That is why I would like to be able to enter the Sacratorium. I would like to see the robot.” (Dors kicked lightly at Seldon’s ankle but he ignored her.)
Mycelium Seventy-Two said uneasily “I don’t believe in such things. Scholarly people don’t.” But he looked about as though he was afraid of being overheard.
Seldon said “I’ve read that a robot still exists in the Sacratorium.”
Mycelium Seventy-Two said “I don’t want to talk about such nonsense.”
Seldon persisted. “Where would it be if it was in the Sacratorium?”
“Even if one was there I couldn’t tell you. I haven’t been in there since I was a child.”
“Would you know if there was a special place a hidden place?”
“There’s the Elders’ aerie. Only Elders go there but there’s nothing there.”
“Have you ever been there?”
“No of course not.”
“Then how do you know?”
“I don’t know that there’s no pomegranate tree there. I don’t know that there’s no laser-organ there. I don’
t know that there’s no item of a million different kinds there. Does my lack of knowledge of their absence show they are all present?”
For the moment Seldon had nothing to say.
A ghost of a smile broke through Mycelium Seventy-Two’s look of concern. He said “That’s scholars’ reasoning. I’m not an easy man to tackle you see.
 Just the same I wouldn’t advise you to try to get up into the Elders’ aerie. I don’t think you’d like what would happen if they found a tribesman inside.
 -Well. Best of the Dawn to you.” And he rose suddenly-without warningand hurried away.
Seldon looked after him rather surprised. “What made him rush off like that?”
“I think ” said Dors “it’s because someone is approaching.”
And someone was. A tall man in an elaborate white kirtle crossed by an even more elaborate and subtly glittering red sash glided solemnly toward them.
 He had the unmistakable look of a man with authority and the even more unmistakable look of one who is not pleased.
53.
Hari Seldon rose as the new Mycogenian approached. He hadn’t the slightest idea whether that was the appropriate polite behavior but he had the distinct feeling it would do no harm.
 Dors Venabili rose with him and carefully kept her eyes lowered.
The other stood before them. He too was an old man but more subtly aged than Mycelium Seventy-Two. Age seemed to lend distinction to his still-handsome face.
 His bald head was beautifully round and his eyes were a startling blue contrasting sharply with the bright allbut glowing red of his sash.
The newcomer said “I see you are tribespeople.” His voice was more high-pitched than Seldon had expected but he spoke slowly as though conscious of the weight of authority in every word he uttered.
“So we are ” said Seldon politely but firmly. He saw no reason not to defer to the other’s position but he did not intend to abandon his own.
“Your names?”
“I am Hari Seldon of Helicon. My companion is Dors Venabili of Cinna. And yours man of Mycogen?”
The eyes narrowed in displeasure but he too could recognize an air of authority when he felt it.
“I am Skystrip Two ” he said lifting his head higher “an Elder of the Sacratorium. And your position tribesman?”
“We ” said Seldon emphasizing the pronoun “are scholars of Streeling University. I am a mathematician and my companion is a historian and we are here to study the ways of Mycogen.”
“By whose authority?”
“By that of Sunmaster Fourteen who greeted us on our arrival.”
Skystrip Two fell silent for a moment and then a small smile appeared on his face and he took on an air that was almost benign.
 He said “The High Elder. I know him well.”
“And so you should ” said Seldon blandly. “Is there anything else Elder?”
“Yes.” The Elder strove to regain the high ground. “Who was the man who was with you and who hurried away when I approached?”
Seldon shook his head “We never saw him before Elder and know nothing about him. We encountered him purely by accident and asked about the Sacratorium.”
“What did you ask him?”
“Two questions Elder. We asked if that building was the Sacratorium and if tribespeople were allowed to enter it. He answered in the affirmative to the first question and in the negative to the second.”
“Quite so. And what is your interest in the Sacratorium?”
“Sir we are here to study the ways of Mycogen and is not the Sacratorium the heart and brain of Mycogen?”
“It is entirely ours and reserved for us.”
“Even if an Elder-the High Elder-would arrange for permission in view of our scholarly function?”
“Have you indeed the High Elder’s permission?”
Seldon hesitated the slightest moment while Dors’s eyes lifted briefly to look at him sideways. He decided he could not carry off a lie of this magnitude.
 “No ” he said “not yet.”
“Or ever ” said the Elder. “You are here in Mycogen by authority but even the highest authority cannot exert total control over the public.
 We value our Sacratorium and the populace can easily grow excited over the presence of a tribesperson anywhere in Mycogen but most particularly in the vicinity of the Sacratorium.
 It would take one excitable person to raise a cry of ‘Invasion!’ and a peaceful crowd such as this one would be turned into one that would be thirsting to tear you apart.
 I mean that quite literally. For your own good even if the High Elder has shown you kindness leave. Now!”
“But the Sacratorium” said Seldon stubbornly though Dors was pulling gently at his kirtle.
“What is there in the Sacratorium that can possibly interest you?” said the Elder. “You see it now. There is nothing for you to see in the interior.”
“There is the robot ” said Seldon.
The Elder stared at Seldon in shocked surprise and then bending to bring his lips close to Seldon’s ear whispered harshly “Leave now or I will raise the cry of ‘Invasion!
’ myself. Nor were it not for the High Elder would I give you even this one chance to leave.”
And Dors with surprising strength nearly pulled Seldon off his feet as she stepped hastily away dragging him along until he caught his balance and stepped quickly after her.
54
It was over breakfast the next morning not sooner that Dors took up the subject—and in a way that Seldon found most wounding.
She said “Well that was a pretty fiasco yesterday.”
Seldon who had honestly thought he had gotten away with it without comment looked sullen. “What made it a fiasco?”
“Driven out is what we were. And for what? What did we gain?”
“Only the knowledge that there is a robot in there.”
“Mycelium Seventy-Two said there wasn’t.”
“Of course he said that. He’s a scholaror thinks he is-end what he doesn’t know about the Sacratorium would probably fill that library he goes to. You saw the Elder’s reaction.”
“I certainly did.”
“He would not have reacted like that if there was no robot inside. He was horrified we knew.”
“That’s just your guess Hari. And even if there was we couldn’t get in.”
“We could certainly try. After breakfast we go out and buy a sash for me one of those obiahs. I put it on keep my eyes devoutly downward and walk right in.”
“Skincap and all? They’ll spot you in a microsecond.”
“No they won’t. We’ll go into the library where all the tribespeople data is kept. I’d like to see it anyway.
 From the library which is a Sacratorium annex I gather there will probably be an entrance into the Sacratorium
“Where you will be picked up at once.”
“Not at all. You heard what Mycelium Seventy-Two had to say. Everyone keeps his eyes down and meditates on their great Lost World Aurora.
 No one looks at anyone else. It would probably be a grievous breach of discipline to do so. Then I’ll find the Elders’ aerie“
“Just like that?”
“At one point Mycelium Seventy-Two said he would advise me not to try to get up into the Elders’ aerie. Up. It must be somewhere in that tower of the Sacratorium the central tower.”
Dors shook her head. “I don’t recall the man’s exact words and I don’t think you do either. That’s a terribly weak foundation to wait.” She stopped suddenly and frowned.
“Well?” said Seldon.
“There is an archaic word ‘aerie’ that means ‘a dwelling place on high.’ ‘
“Ah! There you are. You see we’ve learned some vital things as the result of what you tall a fiasco. And if I can find a living robot that’
s twenty thousand years old and if it can tell me-
“Suppose that such a thing exists which passes belief and that you find it which is not very likely how long do you think you will be able to talk to it before your presence is discovered?”
“I don’t know but if I can prove it exists and if I can find it then I’ll think of some way to talk to it.
 It’s too late for me to back out now under any circumstances. Hummin should have left me alone when I thought there was no way of achieving psychohistory.
 Now that it seems there may be I won’t let anything stop me—short of being killed.”
“The Mycogenians may oblige Hari and you can’t run that risk.”
“Yes I can. I’m going to try.”
“No Hari. I must look after you and I can’t let you.”
“You must let me. Finding a way to work out psychohistory is more important than my safety. My safety is only important because I may work out psychohistory.
 Prevent me from doing so and your task loses its meaning. -Think about it.”
Hari felt himself infused with a renewed sense of purpose. Psychohistory-his nebulous theory that he had such a short while ago despaired ever of proving-loomed larger more real.
 Now he had to believe that it was possible; he could feel it in his gut. The pieces seemed to be falling together and although he couldn’
t see the whole pattern yet he was sure the Sacratorium would yield another piece to the puzzle.
“Then I’ll go in with you so I can pull you out you idiot when the time comes.”
“Women can’t enter.”
“What makes me a woman? Only this gray kirtle. You can’t see my breasts under it. I don’t have a woman’s style hairdo with the skincap on.
 I have the same washed unmarked face a man has. The men here don’t have stubble. All I need is a white kirtle and a sash and I can enter.
 Any Sister could do it if she wasn’t held back by a taboo. I am not held back by one.”
“You’re held back by me. I won’t let you. It’s too dangerous.”
“No more dangerous for me than for you.”
“But I must take the risk.”
“Then so must I. Why is your imperative greater than mine?”
“Because” Seldon paused in thought.
“Just tell yourself this ” said Dors her voice hard as rock. “I won’t let you go there without me. If you try I will knock you unconscious and tie you up.
 If you don’t like that then give up any thought of going alone.”
Seldon hesitated and muttered darkly. He gave up the argument at least for now.
55.
The sky was almost cloudless but it was a pale blue as though wrapped in a high thin mist. That thought Seldon was a good touch but suddenly he missed the sun itself.
 No one on Trantor saw the planet’s sun unless he or she went Upperside and even then only when the natural cloud layer broke.
Did native Trantorians miss the sun? Did they give it any thought? When one of them visited another world where a natural sun was in view did he or she stare half-blinded at it with awe?
Why he wondered did so many people spend their lives not trying to find answers to questions-not even thinking of questions to begin with? Was there anything more exciting in life than seeking answers?
His glance shifted to ground level. The wide roadway was lined with low buildings most of them shops. Numerous individual ground-cars moved in both directions each hugging the right side.
 They seemed like a collection of antiques but they were electrically driven and quite soundless. Seldon wondered if “antique” was always a word to sneer at.
 Could it be that silence made up for slowness? Was there any particular hurry to life after all?
There were a number of children on the walkways and Seldon’s lips pressed together in annoyance. Clearly an extended life span for the Mycogenians was impossible unless they were willing to indulge in infanticide.
 The children of both sexes (though it was hard to tell the boys from the girls) wore kirtles that came only a few inches below the knee making the wild activity of childhood easier.
The children also still had hair reduced to an inch in length at most but even so the older ones among them had hoods attached to their kirtles and wore them raised hiding the top of the head altogether.
 It was as though they were getting old enough to make the hair seem a trifle obscene—or old enough to be wishing to hide it in longing for the day of rite of passage when they were depilated.
A thought occurred to Seldon. He said “Dors when you’ve been out shopping who paid you or the Raindrop women?”
“I did of course. The Raindrops never produced a credit tile. But why should they? What was being bought was for us not for them.”
“But you have a Trantorian credit tile-a tribeswoman credit tile.”
“Of course Hari but there was no problem. The people of Mycogen may keep their own culture and ways of thought and habits of life as they wish.
 They can destroy their cephalic hair and wear kirtles. Nevertheless they must use the world’s credits. If they don’t that would choke off commerce and no sensible person would want to do that.
 The credits nerve Hari.” She held up her hand as though she was holding an invisible credit tile.
“And they accepted your credit tile?”
“Never a peep out of them. And never a word about my skincap. Credits sanitize everything.”
“Well that’s good. So I can buy“
“No I’ll do the buying. Credits may sanitize everything but they more easily sanitize a tribeswoman. They’re so used to paying women little or no attention that they automatically pay me the same.
 and here’s the clothing store I’ve been using.”
“I’ll wait out here. Get me a nice red sash-one that looks impressive.”
“Don’t pretend you’ve forgotten our decision. I’ll get two. And another white kirtle also . . . to my measurements.”
“Won’t they think it odd that a woman would be buying a white kirtle?”
“Of course not. They’ll assume I’m buying it for a male companion who happens to be my size. Actually I don’t think they’
ll bother with any assumptions at all as long as my credit tile is good.”
Seldon waited half-expecting someone to come up and greet him as a tribesman or denounce him as one-more likelybut no one did. Those who passed him did so without a glance and even those who glanced in his direction moved on seemingly untouched.
 He was especially nervous about the gray kirtles — the women-walking by in pairs or even worse with a man. They were downtrodden unnoticed snubbed.
 How better to gain a brief notoriety than by shrieking at the sight of a tribesman? But even the women moved on.
They’re not expecting to see a tribesman Seldon thought so they don’t see one.
That he decided augured well for their forthcoming invasion of the Sacratorium. How much less would anyone expect to see tribespeople there and how much more effectively would they therefore fail to see them!
He was in fairly good humor when Dors emerged.
“You have everything?”
“Absolutely.”
“Then lets go back to the room so you can change.”
The white kirtle did not fit her quite as well as the gray one did. Obviously she could not have tried it on or even the densest shopkeeper would have been struck with alarm.
“How do I look Hari?” she asked.
“Exactly like a boy ” said Seldon. “Now let’s try the sash . . . or obiah. I had better get used to calling it that.”
Dors without her skincap was shaking out her hair gratefully. She said sharply “Don’t put it on now. We’re not going to parade through Mycogen with the sash on.
 The last thing we want to do is call attention to ourselves.”
“No no. I just want to see how it goes on.”
“Well not that one. This one is better quality and more elaborate.”
“You’re right Dors. I’ve got to gather in what attention there is. I don’t want them to detect you as a woman.”
“I’m not thinking of that Hari. I just want you to look pretty.”
“A thousand thanks but that’s impossible I suspect. Now let’s see how does this work?”
Together Hari and Dors practiced putting their obiahs on and taking them off over and over again until they could do it in one fluid motion.
 Dors taught Hari how to do it as she had seen a man doing it the day before at the Sacratorium.
When Hari praised her for her acute observations she blushed and said “Its really nothing Hari just something I noticed.”
Hari replied “Then you’re a genius for noticing.”
Finally satisfied they stood well apart each surveying the other. Hari’s obiah glittered a bright red dragonlike design standing out against a paler field of similar hue.
 Dors’s was a little less bold had a simple thin line down the center and was very light in color. “There ” she said “just enough to show good taste.” She took it off.
“Now ” said Seldon “we fold it up and it goes into one of the inner pockets. I have my credit tile-Hummin’s reallyand the key to this place in this one and here on the other side the Book.”
“The Book? Should you be carrying it around?”
“I must. I’m guessing that anyone going to the Sacratorium ought to have a copy of the Book with him. They may intone passages or have readings.
 If necessary we’ll share the Book and maybe no one will notice. Ready?”
“I’ll never be ready but I’m going with you.”
“It will be a tedious trip. Will you check my skincap and make sure no hair shows this time? And don’t scratch your head.”
“I won’t. You look all right.”
“So do you.”
“You also look nervous.”
And Seldon said wryly “Guess why!”
Dors reached out impulsively and squeezed Hari’s hand then drew back as if surprised at herself. Looking down she straightened her white kirtle. Hari himself a trifle surprised and peculiarly pleased cleared his throat and said “Okay let’s go.”
Aerie
ROBOT- . . . A term used in the ancient legends of several worlds for what are more usually called “automata.” Robots are described as generally human in shape and made of metal although some are supposed to have been pseudoorganic in nature.
 Hari Seldon in the course of The Flight is popularly supposed to have seen an actual robot but that story is of dubious origin. Nowhere in Seldon’
s voluminous writings does he mention robots at all although . . .
ENCYCLOPEDIA GALACTICA
56.
They were not noticed.
Hari Seldon and Dors Venabili repeated the trip of the day before and this time no one gave them a second look. Hardly anyone even gave them a first look.
 On several occasions they had to tuck their knees to one side to allow someone sitting on an inner seat to get past them and out.
 When someone got in they quickly realized they had to move over if there was an inner empty seat.
This time they quickly grew tired of the smell of kitties that were not freshly laundered because they were not so easily diverted by what went on outside.
But eventually they were there.
“That’s the library ” said Seldon in a low voice.
“I suppose so ” said Dors. “At least that’s the building that Mycelium SeventyTwo pointed out yesterday.”
They sauntered toward it leisurely.
“Take a deep breath ” said Seldon. “This is the first hurdle.”
The door ahead was open the light within subdued. There were five broad stone steps leading upward. They stepped onto the lowermost one and waited several moments before they realized that their weight did not cause the steps to move upward.
 Dors grimaced very slightly and gestured Seldon upward.
Together they walked up the stairs feeling embarrassed on behalf of Mycogen for its backwardness. Then through a door where at a desk immediately inside was a man bent over the simplest and clumsiest computer Seldon had ever seen.
The man did not look up at them. No need Seldon supposed. White kirtle bald head-all Mycogenians looked so nearly the same that one’
s eyes slid off them and that was to the tribespeople’s advantage at the moment.
The man who still seemed to be studying something on the desk said “Scholars?”
“Scholars ” said Seldon.
The man jerked his head toward a door. “Go in. Enjoy.”
They moved inward and as nearly as they could see they were the only ones in this section of the library. Either the library was not a popular resort or the scholars were few or-most likely both.
Seldon whispered “I thought surely we would have to present some sort of license or permission form and I would have to plead having forgotten it.”
“He probably welcomes our presence under any terms. Did you ever see a place like this? If a place like a person could be dead we would be inside a corpse.”
Most of the books in this section were print-books like the Book in Seldon’s inner pocket. Dors drifted along the shelves studying them.
 She said “Old books for the most part. Part classic. Part worthless.”
“Outside books? Non-Mycogen I mean?”
“Oh yes. If they have their own books they must be kept in another section. This one is for outside research for poor little selfstyled scholars like yesterday’
s. -This is the reference department and here’s an Imperial Encyclopedia . . . must be fifty years old if a day . . . and a computer.”
She reached for the keys and Seldon stopped her. “Wait. Something could go wrong and we’ll be delayed.”
He pointed to a discreet sign above a free-standing set of shelves that glowed with the letters TO THE SACRATORIUM. The second A in SACRATORIUM was dead possibly recently or possibly because no one cared.
 (The Empire thought Seldon was in decay. All parts of it. Mycogen too.)
He looked about. The poor library so necessary to Mycogenian pride perhaps so useful to the Elders who could use it to find crumbs to shore up their own beliefs and present them as being those of sophisticated tribespeople seemed to be completely empty. No one had entered after them.
Seldon said “Let’s step in here out of eyeshot of the man at the door and put on our sashes.”
And then at the door aware suddenly there would be no turning back if they passed this second hurdle he said “Dors don’t come in with me.”
She frowned. “Why not?”
“It’s not safe and I don’t want you to be at risk.”
“I am here to protect you ” she said with soft firmness.
“What kind of protection can you be? I can protect myself though you may not think it. And I’d be handicapped by having to protect you. Don’t you see that?”
“You mustn’t be concerned about me Hari ” said Dors. “Concern is my part.” She tapped her sash where it crossed in the space between her obscured breasts.
“Because Hummin asked you to?”
“Because those are my orders.”
She seized Seldon’s arms just above his elbow and as always he was surprised by her firm grip. She said “I’m against this Hari but if you feel you must go in then I must go in too.”
“All right then. But if anything happens and you can wriggle out of it run. Don’t worry about me.”
“You’re wasting your breath Hari. And you’re insulting me.”
Seldon touched the entrance panel and the portal slid open. Together almost in unison they walked through.
57.
A large room all the larger because it was empty of anything resembling furniture. No chairs no benches no seats of any kind. No stage no drapery no decorations.
No lights merely a uniform illumination of mild unfocused light. The walls were not entirely blank. Periodically arranged in spaced fashion at various heights and in no easy repetitive order there were small primitive twodimensional television screens all of which were operating.
 From where Dors and Seldon stood there was not even the illusion of a third dimension not a breath of true holovision.
There were people present. Not many and nowhere together. They stood singly and like the television monitors in no easy repetitive order. All were white-kirtled all sashed.
For the most part there was silence. No one talked in the usual sense. Some moved their lips murmuring softly. Those who walked did so stealthily eyes downcast.
The atmosphere was absolutely funereal.
Seldon leaned toward Dors who instantly put a finger to her lips then pointed to one of the television monitors. The screen showed an idyllic garden bursting with blooms the camera panning over it slowly.
They walked toward the monitor in a fashion that imitated the others-slow steps putting each foot down softly.
When they were within half a meter of the screen a soft insinuating voice made itself heard: “The garden of Antennin as reproduced from ancient guidebooks and photographs located in the outskirts of Eos. Note the“
Dors said in a whisper Seldon had trouble catching over the sound of the set “It turns on when someone is close and it will turn off if we step away.
 If we’re close enough we can talk under cover but don’t look at me and stop speaking if anyone approaches.”
Seldon his head bent his hands clasped before him (he had noted that this was a preferred posture) said “Any moment I expect someone to start wailing.”
“Someone might. They’re mourning their Lost World ” said Dors.
“I hope they change the films every once in a while. It would be deadly to always see the same ones.”
“They’re all different ” said Dors her eyes sliding this way and that. “They may change periodically. I don’t know.”
“Wait!” said Seldon just a hair’s breadth too loud. He lowered his voice and said “Come this way.”
Dors frowned failing to make out the words but Seldon gestured slightly with his head. Again the stealthy walk but Seldon’s footsteps increased in length as he felt the need for greater speed and Dons catching up pulled sharply-if very briefly-at his kirtle He slowed.
“Robots here ” he said under the cover of the sound as it came on.
The picture showed the corner of a dwelling place with a rolling lawn and a line of hedges in the foreground and three of what could only be described as robots.
 They were metallic apparently and vaguely human in shape.
The recording said “This is a view recently constructed of the establishment of the famous Wendome estate of the third century. The robot you see near the center was according to tradition named Bendar and served twenty-two years according to the ancient records before being replaced.”
Dors said “‘Recently constructed ‘ so they must change views.”
“Unless they’ve been saying recently constructed’ for the last thousand years.”
Another Mycogenian stepped into the sound pattern of the scene and said in a low voice though not as low as the whisperings of Seldon and Dors “Greetings Brothers.”
He did not look at Seldon and Dons as he spoke and after one involuntary and startled glance Seldon kept his head averted. Dors had ignored it all.
Seldon hesitated. Mycelium Seventy-Two had said that there was no talking in the Sacratorium. Perhaps he had exaggerated. Then too he had not been in the Sacratorium since he was a child.
Desperately Seldon decided he must speak. He said in a whisper “And to you Brother greetings.”
He had no idea whether that was the correct formula of reply or if there was a formula but the Mycogenian seemed to find nothing amiss in it.
“To you in Aurora ” he said.
“And to you ” said Seldon and because it seemed to him that the other expected more he added “in Aurora ” and there was an impalpable release of tension. Seldon felt his forehead growing moist.
The Mycogenian said “Beautiful! I haven’t seen this before.”
“Skillfully done ” said Seldon. Then in a burst of daring he added “A loss never to be forgotten.”
The other seemed startled then said “Indeed indeed ” and moved away.
Dors hissed “Take no chances. Don’t say what you don’t have to.’
“It seemed natural. Anyway this it recent. But those are disappointing robots. They are what I would expect automata to be. I want to see the organic ones-the humanoids.”
“If they existed ” said Dors with some hesitation “it seems to me they wouldn’t be used for gardening jobs.”
“True ” said Seldon. “We must find the Elders’ aerie.”
“If that exists. It seems to me there is nothing in this hollow cave but a hollow cave.”
“Let’s look.”
They paced along the wall passing from screen to screen trying to wait at each for irregular intervals until Dors clutched Seldon’s arms. Between two screens were lines marking out a faint rectangle.
“A door ” Dors said. Then she weakened the assertion by adding “Do you think?”
Seldon looked about surreptitiously. It was in the highest degree convenient that in keeping with the mourning atmosphere every face when not fixed on a television monitor was bent in sad concentration on the floor.
Seldon said “How do you suppose it would open?”
“An entrance patch.”
“I can’t make out any.”
“It’s just not marked out but there’s a slight discoloration there. Do you see it? How many palms? How many times?”
“I’ll try. Keep an eye out and kick me if anyone looks in this direction.”
He held his breath casually touched the discolored spot to no avail and then placed his palm full upon it and pressed.
The door opened silently-not a creak not a scrape. Seldon stepped through as rapidly as he could and Dors followed him. The door closed behind them.
“The question is ” said Dors “did anyone see us?”
Seldon said “Elders must go through this door frequently.”
“Yes but will anyone think we are Elders?”
Seldon waited then said “If we were observed and if anyone thought something was wrong this door would have been flung open again within fifteen seconds of our entering.”
“Possibly ” said Dors dryly “or possibly there is nothing to be seen or done on this side of the door and no one cares if we enter.”
“That remains to be seen ” muttered Seldon.
The rather narrow room they had entered was somewhat dark but as they stepped farther into it the light brightened.
There were chairs wide and comfortable small tables several davenports a deep and tall refrigerator cupboards.
“If this is the Elders’ aerie ” said Seldon “the Elders seem to do themselves comfortably despite the austerity of the Sacratorium itself.”
“As would be expected ” said Dors. “Asceticism among a ruling class except for public show-is very rare. Put that down in your notebook for psychohistorical aphorisms.
” She looked about. “And there is no robot.”
Seldon said “A aerie is a high position remember and this ceiling is not. There must be upper storeys and that must be the way.
” He pointed to a well-carpeted stairway.
He did not advance toward it however but looked about vaguely.
Dors guessed what he was seeking. She said “Forget about elevators. There’s a cult of primitivism in Mycogen. Surely you haven’t forgotten that have you?
 There would be no elevators and what’s more if we place our weight at the foot of the stairs I am quite certain it will not begin moving upward.
 We’re going to have to climb it. Several flights perhaps.”
“Climb it?”
“It must in the nature of things lead to the aerie-if it leads anywhere. Do you want to see the aerie or don’t you?”
Together they stepped toward the staircase and began the climb.
They went up three flights and as they did the light level decreased perceptibly and in steady increments. Seldon took a deep breath and whispered “I consider myself to be in pretty good shape but I hate this.”
“You’re not used to this precise type of physical exertion.” She showed no signs of physical distress whatever.
At the top of the third flight the stairs ended and before them was another door.
“And if it’s locked?” said Seldon more to himself than to Dors. “Do we try to break it down?”
But Dors said “Why should it be locked when the lower door was nor? If this is the Elders’ aerie I imagine there’s a taboo on anyone but Elders coming here and a taboo is much stronger than any lock.”
“As far as those who accept the taboo are concerned ” said Seldon but he made no move toward the door.
“There’s still time to turn back since you hesitate ” said Dors. “In fact I would advise you to rum back.”
“I only hesitate because I don’t know what we’ll find inside. If it’s empty“
And then he added in a rather louder voice “Then it’s empty ” and he strode forward and pushed against the entry panel.
The door retracted with silent speed and Seldon took a step back at the surprising flood of light from within.
And there facing him eyes alive with light arms half-upraised one foot slightly advanced before the other gleaming with a faintly yellow metallic shine was a human figure.
 For a few moments it seemed to be wearing a tight-fitting tunic but on closer inspection it became apparent that the tunic was part of the structure of the object.
“It’s the robot ” said Seldon in awe “but it’s metallic.”
“Worse than that ” said Dors who had stepped quickly to one side and then to the other. “Its eyes don’t follow me.
 Its arms don’t as much as tremble. It’s not alive-if one can speak of robots as being alive.”
And a man-unmistakably a man-stepped out from behind the robot and said “Perhaps not. But I am alive.”
And almost automatically Dors stepped forward and took her place between Seldon and the man who had suddenly appeared.
58.
Seldon pushed Dors to one side perhaps a shade more roughly than he intended. “I don’t need protection. This is our old friend Sunmaster Fourteen.”
The man who faced them wearing a double sash that was perhaps his right as High Elder said “And you are Tribesman Seldon.”
“Of course ” said Seldon.
“And this despite her masculine dress is Tribeswoman Venabili.”
Dors said nothing.
Sunmaster Fourteen said “You are right of course tribesman. You are in no danger of physical harm from me. Please sit down. Both of you.
 Since you are not a Sister tribeswoman you need not retire. There is a seat for you which if you value such a distinction you will be the first woman ever to have used.”
“I do not value such a distinction ” said Dors spacing her words for emphasis.
Sunmaster Fourteen nodded. “That is as you wish. I too will sit down for I must ask you questions and I do not care to do it standing.”
They were sitting now in a corner of the room. Seldon’s eyes wandered to the metal robot.
Sunmaster Fourteen said “It if a robot.”
“I know ” said Seldon briefly.
“I know you do ” said Sunmaster Fourteen with similar curtness. “But now that we have settled that matter why are you here?”
Seldon gazed steadily at Sunmaster Fourteen and said “To see the robot.”
“Do you know that no one but an Elder is allowed in the aerie?”
” I did not know that but I suspected it.”
“Do you know that no tribesperson is allowed in the Sacratorium?”
“I was told that.”
“And you ignored the fact is that it?”
“As I said we wanted to see the robot.”
“Do you know that no woman even a Sister is allowed in the Sacratorium except at certain statedand rare-occasions?”
“I was told that.”
“And do you know that no woman is at any timeor for any reason allowed to dress in masculine garb? That holds within the borders of Mycogen for tribeswomen as well as for Sisters.”
“I was not told that but I am not surprised.”
“Good. I want you to understand all this. Now why did you want to see the robot?”
Seldon said with a shrug “Curiosity. I had never seen a robot or even known that such a thing existed.”
“And how did you come to know that it did exist and specifically that it existed here?”
Seldon was silent then said “I do not wish to answer that question.”
“Is that why you were brought to Mycogen by Tribesman Hummin? To investigate robots?”
“No. Tribesman Hummin brought us here that we might be secure. However we are scholars Dr. Venabili and I. Knowledge is our province and to gain knowledge is our purpose.
 Mycogen is little understood outside its borders and we wish to know more about your ways and your methods of thought. It is a natural desire and it seems to us a harmless-even praiseworthy-one.”
“Ah but we do not wish the outer tribes and worlds to know about us. That is our natural desire and we are the judge of what is harmless to us and what harmful. So I ask you again tribesman:
How did you know that a robot existed in Mycogen and that it existed in this room?”
“General rumor ” said Seldon at length.
“Do you insist on that?”
“General rumor. I insist on it.”
Sunmaster Fourteen’s keen blue eyes seemed to sharpen and he said without raising his voice “Tribesman Seldon we have long cooperated with Tribesman Hummin.
 For a tribesman he has seemed a decent and trustworthy individual. For a tribesman! When he brought you two to us and commended you to our protection we granted it.
 But Tribesman Hummin whatever his virtues is still a tribesman and we had misgivings. We were not at all sure what your—or his-real purpose might be.”
“Our purpose was knowledge ” said Seldon. “Academic knowledge. Tribeswoman Venabili is a historian and I too have an interest in history. Why should we not be interested in Mycogenian history?”
“For one thing because we do not wish you to be. -In any case two of our trusted Sisters were sent to you. They were to cooperate with you try to find out what it was you wanted and-what is the expression you tribesmen use?
-play along with you. Yet not in such a way that you would be too aware as to what was happening.” Sunmaster Fourteen smiled but it was a grim smile.
“Raindrop Forty-Five ” Sunmaster Fourteen went on “went shopping with Tribeswoman Venabili but there seemed nothing out of the way in what happened on those trips.
 Naturally we had a full report. Raindrop Forty-Three showed you Tribesman Seldon our microfarms. You might have been suspicious of her willingness to accompany you alone something that is utterly out of the question for us but you reasoned that what applied to Brothers did not apply to tribesmen and you flattered yourself that that flimsy bit of reasoning won her over.
 She complied with your desire though at considerable cost to her peace of mind. And eventually you asked for the Book. To have handed it over too easily might have roused your suspicion so she pretended to a perverse desire only you could satisfy.
 Her self-sacrifice will not be forgotten. -I take it tribesman you still have the Book and I suspect you have it with you now. May I have it?”
Seldon sat in bitter silence.
Sunmaster Fourteen’s wrinkled hand remained obtrusively outstretched and he said “How much better it would be than to wrest it from you by force.”
And Seldon handed it over. Sunmaster Fourteen leafed through its pages briefly as though to reassure himself it was unharmed.
He said with a small sigh “It will have to be carefully destroyed in the approved manner. Sad’. but once you had this Book we were of course not surprised when you made your way out to the Sacratorium.
 You were watched at all times for you cannot think that any Brother or Sister not totally absorbed would not recognize you for tribespeople at a glance.
 We know a skincap when we see one and there are less than seventy of them in Mycogen . . . almost all belonging to tribesmen on official business who remain entirely in secular governmental buildings during the time they are here.
 So you were not only seen but unmistakably identified over and over.
“The elderly Brother who met you was careful to tell you about the library as well as about the Sacratorium but he was also careful to tell you what you were forbidden to do for we did not wish to entrap you.
 Skystrip Two also warned you . . . and quite forcibly. Nevertheless you did not turn away.
“The shop at which you bought the white kirtle and the two sashes informed us at once and from that we knew well what you intended.
 The library was kept empty the librarian was warned to keep his eyes to himself the Sacratorium was kept under-utilized. The one Brother who inadvertently spoke to you almost gave it away but hastened off when he realized with whom he was dealing. And then you came up here.
“You see then that it was your intention to come up here and that we in no way lured you here. You came as a result of your own action your own desire and what I want to ask you-yet once again-is: Why?”
It was Dors who answered this time her voice firm her eyes hard. “We will tell you yet once again Mycogenian. We are scholars who consider knowledge sacred and it is only knowledge that we seek.
 You did not lure us here but you did not stop us either as you might have done before ever we approached this building. You smoothed our way and made it easy for us and even that might be considered a lure.
 And what harm have we done? We have in no way disturbed the building or this room or you or that.”
She pointed to the robot. “It is a dead lump of metal that you hide here and we now know that it is dead and that is all the knowledge we sought.
 We thought it would be more significant and we are disappointed but now that we know it is merely what it is we will leave-and if you wish we will leave Mycogen as well.”
Sunmaster Fourteen listened with no trace of expression on his face but when she was done he addressed Seldon saying “This robot as you see it is a symbol a symbol of all we have lost and of all we no longer have of all that through thousands of years we have not forgotten and what we intend someday to return to.
 Because it is all that remains to us that is both material and authentic it is dear to us-yet to your woman it is only ‘a dead lump of metal.
’ Do you associate yourself with that judgment Tribesman Seldon?”
Seldon said “We are members of societies that do not tie ourselves to a past that is thousands of years old making no contact at all with what has existed between that past and ourselves.
 We live in the present which we recognize as the product of al! the past and not of one long-gone moment of time that we hug to our chests.
 We realize intellectually what the robot may mean to you and we are willing to let it continue to mean that to you. But we can only see it with our own eyes as you can only see it with yours.
 To us it is a dead lump of metal.”
“And now ” said Dors “we will leave.”
“You will not ” said Sunmaster Fourteen. “By coming here you have committed a crime. It is a crime only in our eyes as you will hasten to point out”
-his lips curved in a wintry smile “but this is our territory and within it we make the definitions. And this crime as we define it is punishable by death.”
“And you are going to shoot us down?” said Dors haughtily.
Sunmaster Fourteen’s expression was one of contempt and he continued to speak only to Seldon. “What do you think we are Tribesman Seldon? Our culture is as old as yours as complex as civilized as humane.
 I am not armed. You will be tried and since you are manifestly guilty executed according to law quickly and painlessly.
“If you were to try to leave now I would not stop you but there are many Brothers below many more than there appeared to be when you entered the Sacratorium and in their rage at your action they may lay rough and forceful hands on you.
 It has happened in our history that tribespeople have even died so and it is not a pleasant death-certainly not a painless one.”
“We were warned of this ” said Dors “by Skystrip Two. So much for your complex civilized and humane culture.”
“People can be moved to violence at moments of emotion Tribesman Seldon ” said Sunmaster Fourteen calmly “whatever their humanity in moments of calm. This is true in every culture as your woman who is said to be a historian must surely know.”
Seldon said “Let us remain reasonable Sunmaster Fourteen. You may be the law in Mycogen over local affairs but you are not the law over us and you know it.
 We are both non-Mycogenian citizens of the Empire and it is the Emperor and his designated legal officers who must remain in charge of any capital offense.”
Sunmaster Fourteen said “That may be so in statutes and on papers and on holovision screens but we are not talking theory now. The High Elder has long had the power to punish crimes of sacrilege without interference from the Imperial throne.”
“If the criminals are your own people ” said Seldom “It would be quite different if they were outsiders.”
“I doubt it in this case. Tribesman Hummin brought you here as fugitives and we are not so yeast-headed in Mycogen that we don’
t strongly suspect that you are fugitives from the Emperor’s laws. Why should he object if we do his work for him?”
“Because ” said Seldon “he would. Even if we were fugitives from the Imperial authorities and even if he wanted us only to punish us he would still want us.
 To allow you to kill by whatever means and for whatever reason non-Mycogenians without due Imperial process would be to defy his authority and no Emperor could allow such a precedent.
 No matter how eager he might be to see that the microfood trade not be interrupted he would still feel it necessary to re-establish the Imperial prerogative.
 Do you wish in your eagerness to kill us to hove a division of Imperial soldiery loot your farms and your dwellings desecrate your Sacratorium and take liberties with the Sisters: Consider.”
Sunmaster Fourteen smiled once again but displayed no softness. “Actually I have considered and there is an alternative. After we condemn you we could delay your execution to allow you to appeal to the Emperor for a review of your case.
 The Emperor might be grateful at this evidence of our ready submission to his authority and grateful too to lay his hands on you two-for some reason of his ownand Mycogen might profit.
 Is that what you want then? To appeal to the Emperor in due course and to be delivered to him?”
Seldon and Dors looked at each other briefly and were silent.
Sunmaster Fourteen said “I feel you would rather be delivered to the Emperor than die but why do I get the impression that the preference is only by a slight margin?”
“Actually ” said a new voice “I think neither alternative is acceptable and that we must search for a third.”
59.
It was Dors who identified the newcomer first perhaps because it was she who expected him.
“Hummin ” she said “thank goodness you found us. I got in touch with you the moment I realized I was not going to deflect Hari from”
-she held up her hands in a wide gesture “this.”
Hummin’s smile was a small one that did not alter the natural gravity of his face. There was a subtle weariness about him.
“My dear ” he said “I was engaged in other things. I cannot always pull away at a moment’s notice. And when I got here I had like you two to supply myself with a kirde and sash to say nothing of a skincap and make my way out here.
 Had I been here earlier I might have stopped this but I believe I’m not too late.”
Sunmaster Fourteen had recovered from what had seemed to be a painful shock. He said in a voice that lacked its customary severe depth “How did you get in here Tribesman Hummin?”
“It was not easy High Elder but as Tribeswoman Venabili likes to say I am a very persuasive person. Some of the citizens here remember who I was and what I have done for Mycogen in the past that I am even an honorary Brother. Have you forgotten Sunmaster Fourteen?”
The Elder replied “I have not forgotten but even the most favorable memory can not survive certain actions. A tribesman here and a tribeswoman. There is no greater crime.
 All you have done is not great enough to balance that. My people are not unmindful. We will make it up to you some other way.
 But these two must die or be handed over to the Emperor.”
“I am also here ” said Hummin calmly. “Is that not a crime as well?”
“For you ” said Sunmaster Fourteen “for you personally as a kind of honorary Brother I can . . . overlook it . . . once. Not these two.’
“Because you expect a reward from the Emperor? Some favor? Some concession? Have you already been in touch with him or with his Chief of Staff Eto Demerzel more likely?”
“That is not a subject for discussion.”
“Which is itself an admission. Come on I don’t ask what the Emperor promised but it cannot be much. He does not have much to give in these degenerate days.
 Let me make you an offer. Have these two told you they are scholars?”
“They have.”
“And they are. They are not lying. The tribeswoman is a historian and the tribesman is a mathematician. The two together are trying to combine their talents to make a mathematics of history and they call the combined subject ‘psychohistory.’ “
Sunmaster Fourteen said “I know nothing about this psychohistory nor do I care to know. Neither it nor any other facet of your tribal learning interests me.”
“Nevertheless ” said Hummin “I suggest that you listen to me.”
It took Hummin some fifteen minutes speaking concisely to describe the possibility of organizing the natural laws of society (something he always mentioned with audible quotation marks in the tone of his voice)
 in such a way as to make it possible to anticipate the future with a substantial degree of probability.
And when he was done Sunmaster Fourteen who had listened expressionlessly said “A highly unlikely piece of speculation I should say.”
Seldon with a rueful expression seemed about to speak undoubtedly to agree but Hummin’s hand resting lightly on the other’s knee tightened unmistakably.
Hummin said “Possibly High Elder but the Emperor doesn’t think so. And by the Emperor who is himself an amiable enough personage I really mean Demerzel concerning whose ambitions you need no instruction.
 They would like very much to have these two scholars which is why I’ve brought them here for safekeeping. I had little expectation that you would do Demerzel’
s work for him by delivering the scholars to him.”
“They have committed a crime that“
“Yes we know High Elder but it is only a crime because you choose to call it so. No real harm has been done.”
“It has been done to our belief to our deepest felt“
“But imagine what harm will be done if psychohistory falls into the hands of Demerzel. Yes I grant that nothing may come of it but suppose for a moment that something does and that the Imperial government has the use of it-can foretell what is to come-can take measures with that foreknowledge which no one else would have-can take measures in fact designed to bring about an alternate future more to the Imperial liking.”
“Well?”
“Is there any doubt High Elder that the alternate furore more to the Imperial liking would be one of tightened centralization? For centuries now as you very well know the Empire has been undergoing a steady decentralization.
 Many worlds now acknowledge only lip service to the Emperor and virtually rule themselves. Even here on Trantor there is decentralization. Mycogen as only one example is free of Imperial interference for the most part.
 You rule its High Elder and there is no Imperial officer at your side overseeing your actions and decisions. How long do you think that will last with men like Demerzel adjusting the furore to their liking?”
“Still the flimsiest of speculation ” said Sunmaster Fourteen “but an disturbing one I admit.”
“On the other hand if these scholars can complete their task an unlikely if you might say but an if-then they are sure to remember that you spared them when you might have chosen not to.
 And it would then be conceivable that they would learn to arrange a future for instance that would allow Mycogen to be given a world of its own a world that could be terraformed into a close replica of the Lost World.
 And even if these two forget your kindness I will be here to remind them.”
“Well” said Sunmaster Fourteen.
“Come on ” said Hummin “it is not hard to decide what must be going through your mind. Of all tribespeople you must trust Demerzel the least.
 And though the chance of psychohistory might be small (if I was not being honest with you I would not admit that) it is not zero;
 and if it will bring about a restoration of the Lost World what can you want more than that? What would you not risk for even a tiny chance of that?
 Come now-I promise you and my promises are not lightly given. Release these two and choose a tiny chance of your heart’s desire over no chance at all.”
There was silence and then Sunmaster Fourteen sighed. “I don’t know how it is Tribesman Hummin but on every occasion that we meet you persuade me into something I do not really want to do.”
“Have I ever misled you High Elder?”
“You have never offered me so small a chance?”
“And so high a possible reward. The one balances the other.”
And Sunmaster Fourteen nodded his head. “You are right. Take these two and take them out of Mycogen and never let me see them again unless there comes a time whenbut surely it will not be in my lifetime.”
“Perhaps not High Elder. But your people have been waiting patiently for nearly twenty thousand years. Would you then object to waiting another-perhaps-two hundred?”
“I would not willingly wait one moment but my people will wait as long as they must.”
And standing up he said “I will clear the path. Take them and go. “
60.
They were finally back in a tunnel. Hummin and Seldon had traveled through one when they went from the Imperial Sector to Streeling University in the air-taxi.
 Now they were in another tunnel going from Mycogen to . . . Seldon did not know where. He hesitated to ask. Hummin’s face seemed as if it was carved out of granite and it didn’t welcome conversation.
Hummin sat in the front of the four-seater with no one to his right. Seldon and Dors shared the backseat.
Seldon chanced a smile at Dors who looked glum. “It’s nice to be in real clothes again isn’t it?”
“I will never ” said Dors with enormous sincerity “wear or look at anything that resembles a kirtle. And I will never under any circumstances wear a skincap.
 In fact I’m going to feel odd if I ever see a normally bald man.”
And it was Dors who finally asked the question that Seldon had been reluctant to advance. “Chetter ” she said rather petulantly “why won’
t you tell us where we’re going?”
Hummin hitched himself into a sideways position and he looked back at Dors and Seldon gravely. “Somewhere ” he said “where it may be difficult for you to get into trouble-although I’m not sure such a place exists.”
Dors was at once crestfallen. “Actually Chetter it’s my fault. At Streeling I let Hari go Upperside without accompanying him. In Mycogen I at least accompanied him but I suppose I ought not to have let him enter the Sacratorium at all.”
“I was determined ” said Seldon warmly. “It was in no way Dors’s fault.”
Hummin made no effort to apportion blame. He simply said “I gather you wanted to see the robot. Was there a reason for that? Can you tell me?”
Seldon could feel himself redden. ” I was wrong in that respect Hummin. I did not see what I expected to see or what I hoped to see.
 If I had known the content of the aerie I would never have bothered going there. Call it a complete fiasco.”
“But then Seldon what was it you hoped to see? Please tell me.
Take your time if you wish. This is a long trip and I am willing to listen.”
“The thing is Hummin that I had the idea that there were humaniform robots that they were long-lived that at least one might still be alive and that it might be in the aerie.
 There was a robot there but it was metallic it was dead and it was merely a symbol. Had I but known“
“Yes. Did we all but know there would be no need for questions or for research of any kind. Where did you get your information about humaniform robots?
 Since no Mycogenian would have discussed that with you I can think of only one source. The Mycogenian Book-a powered print-book in ancient Auroran and modern Galactic. Am I right?”
“Yes.”
“And how did you get a copy?”
Seldon paused then muttered “Its somewhat embarrassing.”
“I am not easily embarrassed Seldon.”
Seldon told him and Hummin allowed a very small smile to twitch across his face.
Hummin said “Didn’t it occur to you that what occurred had to be a charade? No Sister would do a thing like that-except under instruction and with a great deal of persuading.”
Seldon frowned and said with asperity “That was not at all obvious. People are perverted now and then. And its easy for you to grin.
 I didn’t have the information you had and neither did Dors. If you did not wish me to fall into traps you might have warned me of those that existed.”
“I agree. I withdraw my remark. In any case you don’t have the Book any longer I’m sure.”
“No. Sunmaster Fourteen took it from me.”
“How much of it did you read?”
“Only a small fraction. I didn’t have time. It’s a huge book and I must tell you Hummin it is dreadfully dull.”
“Yes I know that for I think I have read more of it than you have. It is not only dull it is totally unreliable.
 It is a one-sided official Mycogenian view of history that is more intent on presenting that view than a reasoned objectivity. It is even deliberately unclear in spots so that outsiders-even if they were to read the Book-would never know entirely what they read.
 What was it for instance that you thought you read about robots that interested you?”
“I’ve already told you. They speak of humaniform robots robots that could not be distinguished from human beings in outward appearance.”
“How many of these would exist?” asked Hummin.
“They don’t say. -At least I didn’t come across a passage in which they gave numbers. There may have been only a handful but one of them the Book refers to as ‘Renegade.
’ It seems to have an unpleasant significance but I couldn’t make out what.”
“You didn’t tell me anything about that ” interposed Dors. “If you had I would have told you that it’s not a proper name.
 It’s another archaic word and it means roughly what ‘traitor’ would mean in Galactic. The older word has a greater aura of fear about it.
 A traitor somehow sneaks to his treason but a renegade flaunts it. .
Hummin said “I’ll leave the fine points of archaic language to you Dors but in any case if the Renegade actually existed and if it was a humaniform robot then clearly as a traitor and enemy it would not be preserved and venerated in the Elders’ aerie.”
Seldon said “I didn’t know the meaning of ‘Renegade ‘ but as I said I did get the impression that it was an enemy.
 I thought it might have been defeated and preserved as a reminder of the Mycogenian triumph.”
“Was there any indication in the Book that the Renegade was defeated?”
“No but I might have missed that portion“
“Not likely. Any Mycogenian victory would be announced in the Book unmistakably and referred to over and over again.”
“There was another point the Book made about the Renegade ” said Seldon hesitating “but I can’t be at all sure I understood it.”
Hummin said “As I told you . . . They are deliberately obscure at times.”
“Nevertheless they seemed to say that the Renegade could somehow tap human emotions . . . influence them“
“Any politician can ” said Hummin with a shrug. “It’s called charisma-when it works.”
Seldon sighed. “Well I wanted to believe. That was it. I would have given a great deal to find an ancient humaniform robot that was still alive and that I could question.”
“For what purpose?” asked Hummin.
“To learn the details of the primordial Galactic society when it still consisted of only a handful of worlds. From so small a Galaxy psychohistory could be deduced more easily.”
Hummin said “Are you sure you could trust what you heard? After many thousands of years would you be willing to rely on the robot’
s early memories? How much distortion would have entered into them?”
“That’s right ” said Dors suddenly. “It would be like the computerized records I told you of Hari. Slowly those robot memories would be discarded lost erased distorted.
 You can only go back so far and the farther you go back the less reliable the information becomes-no matter what you do.”
Hummin nodded. “I’ve heard it referred to as a kind of uncertainty principle in information.”
“But wouldn’t it be possible ” said Seldon thoughtfully “that some information for special reasons would be preserved? Parts of the Mycogenian Book may well refer to events of twenty thousand years ago and yet be very largely as it had been originally.
 The more valued and the more carefully preserved particular information is the more long-lasting and accurate it may be.”
“The key word is ‘particular.’ What the Book may care to preserve may not be what you wish to have preserved and what a robot may remember best may be what you wish him to remember least.”
Seldon said in despair “In whatever direction I turn to seek a way of working out psychohistory matters so arrange themselves as to make it impossible. Why bother trying?”
“It might seem hopeless now ” said Hummin unemotionally “but given the necessary genius a route to psychohistory may be found that none of us would at this moment expect.
 Give yourself more time. but we’re coming to a rest area. Let us pull off and have dinner.”
Over the lamb patties on rather tasteless bread (most unpalatable after the fare at Mycogen) Seldon said “You seem to assume Hummin that I am the possessor of ‘the necessary genius.’ I may not be you know.”
Hummin said “That’s true. You may not be. However I know of no alternate candidate for the post so I must cling to you.”
And Seldon sighed and said “Well I’ll try but I’m out of any spark of hope. Possible but not practical I said to begin with and I’
m more convinced of that now than I ever was before.”
Heatsink
AMARYL YUGO- . . . A mathematician who next to Hari Seldon himself may be considered most responsible for working out the details of psychohistory. It was he who . . .
. . . Yet the conditions under which he began life are almost more dramatic than his mathematical accomplishments. Born into the hopeless poverty of the lower classes of Dahl a sector of ancient Tractor he might have passed his life in utter obscurity were it not for the fact that Seldon quite by accident encountered him in the course of . . .
ENCYCLOPEDIA GALACTICA
61.
The Emperor of all the Galaxy felt weary-physically weary. His lips ached from the gracious smile he had had to place on his face at careful intervals.
 His neck was stiff from having inclined his head this way and that in a feigned show of interest. His ears pained from having to listen.
 His whole body throbbed from having to rise and to sit and to turn and to hold out his hand and to nod.
It was merely a state function where one had to meet Mayors and Viceroys and Ministers and their wives or husbands from here and there in Trantor and (worse)
 from here and there in the Galaxy. There were nearly a thousand present all in costumes that varied from the ornate to the downright outlandish and he had had to listen to a babble of different accents made the worse by an effort to speak the Emperor’
s Galactic as spoken at the Galactic University. Worst of all the Emperor had had to remember to avoid making commitments of substance while freely applying the lotion of words without substance.
All had been recorded sight and sound-very discreetlyand Eto Demerzel would go over it to see if Cleon First of that Name had behaved himself.
 That of course was only the way that the Emperor put it to himself. Demerzel would surely say that he was merely collecting data on any unintentional self-revelation on the pan of the guests. And perhaps he was.
Fortunate Demerzel!
The Emperor could not leave the Palace and its extensive grounds while Demerzel could range the Galaxy if he wished. The Emperor was always on display always accessible always forced to deal with visitors from the important to the merely intrusive.
 Demerzel remained anonymous and never allowed himself to be seen inside the Palace grounds. He remained merely a fearsome name and an invisible (and therefore the more frightening) presence.
The Emperor was the Inside Man with all the trappings and emoluments of power. Demerzel was the Outside Man with nothing evident not even a formal title but with his fingers and mind probing everywhere and asking for no reward for his tireless labors but one-the reality of power.
It amused the Emperor-in a macabre sort of way-to consider that at any moment without warning with a manufactured excuse or with none at all he could have Demerzel arrested imprisoned exiled tortured or executed.
 After all in these annoying centuries of constant unrest the Emperor might have difficulty in exerting his will over the various planets of the Empire even over the various sectors of Trantor-with their rabble of local executives and legislatures that he was forced to deal with in a maze of interlocking decrees protocols commitments treaties and general interstellar legalitiesbut at least his powers remained absolute over the Palace and its grounds.
And yet Cleon knew that his dreams of power were useless. Demerzel had served his father and Cleon could not remember a time when he did not turn to Demerzel for everything.
 It was Demerzel who knew it all devised it all did it all. More than that it was on Demerzel that anything that went wrong could be blamed.
 The Emperor himself remained above criticism and had nothing to fear except of course palace coups and assassination by his nearest and dearest. It was to prevent this above all that he depended upon Demerzel.
Emperor Cleon felt a tiny shudder at the thought of trying to do without Demerzel. There had been Emperors who had ruled personally who had had a series of Chiefs of Staff of no talent who had had incompetents serving in the post and had kept themand somehow they had gotten along for a time and after a fashion.
But Cleon could not. He needed Demerzel. In fact now that the thought of assassination had come to him-and in view of the modern history of the Empire it was inevitable that it had come to him-he could see that getting rid of Demerzel was quite impossible.
 It couldn’t be done. No matter how cleverly he Cleon would attempt to arrange it Demerzel (he was sure) would anticipate the move somehow would know it was on its way and would arrange with far superior cleverness a palace coup.
 Cleon would be dead before Demerzel could possibly be taken away in chains and there would simply be another Emperor that Demerzel would serve and dominate.
Or would Demerzel tire of the game and make himself Emperor?
Never! The habit of anonymity was too strong in him. If Demerzel exposed himself to the world then his powers his wisdom his luck (whatever it was)
 would surely desert him. Cleon was convinced of that. He felt it to be beyond dispute.
So while he behaved himself Cleon was safe. With no ambitions of his own Demerzel would serve him faithfully.
And now here was Demerzel dressed so severely and simply that it made Cleon uneasily conscious of the useless ornamentation of his robes of state now thankfully removed with the aid of two valets.
 Naturally it would not be until he was alone and in dishabille that Demerzel would glide into view.
“Demerzel ” said the Emperor of all the Galaxy “I am tired!”
“State functions are tiring Sire ” murmured Demerzel.
“Then must I have them every evening?”
“Not every evening but they are essential. It gratifies others to see you and to be taken note of by you. It helps keep the Empire running smoothly.”
“The Empire used to be kept running smoothly by power ” said the Emperor somberly. “Now it must be kept running by a smile a wave of the hand a murmured word and a medal or a plaque.”
“If all that keeps the peace Sire there is much to be said for it. And your reign proceeds well.”
“You know why-because I have you at my side. My only real gift is that I am aware of your importance.” He looked at Demerzel slyly.
 “My son need not be my heir. He is not a talented boy. What if I make you my heir?”
Demerzel said freezingly “Sire that is unthinkable. I would not usurp the throne. I would not steal it from your rightful heir. Besides if I have displeased you punish me justly.
 Surely nothing I have done or could possibly do deserves the punishment of being made Emperor.”
Cleon laughed. “For that true assessment of the value of the Imperial throne Demerzel I abandon any thought of punishing you. Come now let us talk about something.
 I would sleep but I am not yet ready for the ceremonies with which they put me to bed. Let us talk.”
“About what Sire?”
“About anything. -About that mathematician and his psychohistory. I think about him every once in a while you know. I thought of him at dinner tonight.
 I wondered: What if a psychohistorical analysis would predict a method for making it possible to be an Emperor without endless ceremony?”
“I somehow think Sire that even the cleverest psychohistorian could not manage that.”
“Well tell me the latest. Is he still hiding among those peculiar baldheads of Mycogen? You promised you would winkle him out of there.”
“So I did Sire and I moved in that direction but I regret that I must say that I failed.”
“Failed?” The Emperor allowed himself to frown. “I don’t like that. “
“Nor I Sire. I planned to have the mathematician be encouraged to commit some blasphemous act-such acts are easy to commit in Mycogen especially for an outsider-one that would call for severe punishment.
 The mathematician would then be forced to appeal to the Emperor and as a result we would get him. I planned it at the cost of insignificant concessions on our part-important to Mycogen totally unimportant to us—
and I meant to play no direct role in the arrangement. It was to be handled subtly.”
“I dare say ” said Cleon “but it failed. Did the Mayor of Mycogen
“He is called the High Elder Sire.”
“Do not quibble over titles. Did this High Elder refuse?”
“On the contrary Sire he agreed and the mathematician Seldon fell into the trap neatly.”
“Well then?”
“He was allowed to leave unharmed.”
“Why?” said Cleon indignantly.
“Of this I am not certain Sire but I suspect we were outbid.”
“By whom? By the Mayor of Wye?”
“Possibly Sire but I doubt that. I have Wye under constant surveillance. If they had gained the mathematician I would know it by now.”
The Emperor was not merely frowning. He was clearly enraged. “Demerzel this is bad. I am greatly displeased. A failure like this makes me wonder if you are perhaps not the man you once were.
 What measures shall we take against Mycogen for this clear defiance of the Emperor’s wishes?”
Demerzel bowed low in recognition of the storm unleashed but he said in steely tones “It would be a mistake to move against Mycogen now Sire.
 The disruption that would follow would play into the hands of Wye.”
“But we must do something. “
“Perhaps not Sire. It is not as bad as it may seem.”
“How can it be not as bad as it seems?”
“You’ll remember Sire that this mathematician was convinced that psychohistory was impractical.”
“Of course I remember that but that doesn’t matter does it? For our purposes?”
“Perhaps not. But if it were to become practical it would serve our purposes to an infinitely great extent Sire. And from what I have been able to find out the mathematician is now attempting to make psychohistory practical.
 His blasphemous attempt in Mycogen was I understand part of an attempt at solving the problem of psychohistory. In that case it may pay us Sire to leave him to himself.
 It will serve us better to pick him up when he is closer to his goal or has reached it.”
“Not if Wye gets him first.”
“That I shall see to it will not happen.”
“In the same way that you succeeded in winkling the mathematician out of Mycogen just now?”
“I will not make a mistake the next time Sire ” said Demerzel coldly.
The Emperor said “Demerzel you had better not. I will not tolerate another mistake in this respect.” And then he added pettishly “I think I shall not sleep tonight after all.”
62.
Jirad Tisalver of the Dahl Sector was short. The top of his head came up only to Hari Seldon’s nose. He did not seem to take that to heart however.
 He had handsome even features was given to smiling and sported a thick black mustache and crisply curling black hair.
He lived with his wife and a half-grown daughter in an apartment of seven small rooms kept meticulously clean but almost bare of furnishings.
Tisalver said “I apologize Master Seldon and Mistress Venabili that I cannot give you the luxury to which you must be accustomed but Dahl is a poor sector and I am not even among the better-off among our people.”
“The more reason ” responded Seldon “that we must apologize to you for placing the burden of our presence upon you.”
“No burden Master Seldon. Master Hummin has arranged to pay us generously for your use of our humble quarters and the credits would be welcome even if you were notand you are. “
Seldon remembered Hummin’s parting words when they finally arrived in Dahl.
“Seldom” he had said “this is the third place I’ve arranged as sanctuary. The first two were notoriously beyond the reach of the Imperium which might well have served to attract their attention;
 after all they were logical places for you. This one is different. It is poor unremarkable and as a matter of fact unsafe in some ways.
 It is not a natural refuge for you so that the Emperor and his Chief of Staff may not think to turn their eyes in this direction.
 Would you mind staying out of trouble this time then?”
“I will try Hummin ” said Seldon a little offended. “Please be aware that the trouble is not of my seeking. I am trying to learn what may well take me thirty lifetimes to learn if I am to have the slightest chance of organizing psychohistory.”
“I understand ” said Hummin. “Your efforts at learning brought you to Upperside in Streeling and to the Elders’ aerie in Mycogen and to who can guess where in Dahl.
 As for you Dr. Venabili I know you’ve been trying to take care of Seldon but you must try harder. Get it fixed in your head that he is the most important person on Trantoror in the Galaxy for that matterand that he must be kept secure at any cost.”
“I will continue to do my best ” said Dors stiffly.
“And as for your host family they have their peculiarities but they are essentially good people with whom I have dealt before. Try not to get them in trouble either.”
But Tisalver at least did not seem to anticipate trouble of any kind from his new tenants and his expressed pleasure at the company he now had-quite apart from the rent credits he would be getting-seemed quite sincere.
He had never been outside Dahl and his appetite for tales of distant places was enormous. His wife too bowing and smiling would listen and their daughter with a finger in her mouth would allow one eye to peep from behind the door.
It was usually after dinner when the entire family assembled that Seldon and Dors were expected to talk of the outside world. The food was plentiful enough but it was bland and often tough.
 So soon after the tangy food of Mycogen it was all but inedible.
The “table” was a long shelf against one wall and they ate standing up.
Gentle questioning by Seldon elicited the fact that this was the usual situation among Dahlites as a whole and was not due to unusual poverty. Of course Mistress Tisalver explained there were those with high government jobs in Dahl who were prone to adopt all kinds of effete customs like chairs-she called them “body shelves”
but this was looked down upon by the solid middle class.
Much as they disapproved of unnecessary luxury though the Tisalvers loved hearing about it listening with a virtual storm of tongueclicking when told of mattresses lifted on legs of ornate chests and wardrobes and of a superfluity of tableware.
They listened also to a description of Mycogenian customs while Jirad Tisalver stroked his own hair complacently and made it quite obvious that he would as soon think of emasculation as of depilation.
 Mistress Tisalver was furious at any mention of female subservience and flatly refused to believe that the Sisters accepted it tranquilly.
They seized most however on Seldon’s. casual reference to the Imperial grounds. When upon questioning it turned out that Seldon had actually seen and spoken to the Emperor a blanket of awe enveloped the family.
 It took a while before they dared ask questions and Seldon found that he could not satisfy them. He had not after all seen much of the grounds and even less of the Palace interior.
That disappointed the Tisalvers and they were unremitting in their attempts to elicit more. And having heard of Seldon’s Imperial adventure they found it hard to believe Dors’
s assertion that for her part she had never been anywhere in the Imperial grounds. Most of all they rejected Seldon’s casual comment that the Emperor had talked and behaved very much as any ordinary human being would. That seemed utterly impossible to the Tisalvers.
After three evenings of this Seldon found himself tiring. He had at first welcomed the chance to do nothing for a while (during the day at least)
 but view some of the history book-films that Dors recommended. The Tisalvers turned over their book-viewer to their guests during the day with good grace though the little girl seemed unhappy and was sent over to a neighbor’
s apartment to use theirs for her homework.
“It doesn’t help ” Seldon said restlessly in the security of his room after he had piped in some music to discourage eavesdropping. “I can see your fascination with history but it’
s all endless detail. It’s a mountainous heap-no a Galactic heap-of data in which I can’t see the basic organization.”
“I dare say ” said Dors “that there must have been a time when human beings saw no organization in the stars in the sky but eventually they discovered the Galactic structure.”
“And I’m sure that took generations not weeks. There must have been a time when physics seemed a mass of unrelated observations before the central natural laws were discovered and that took generations. and what of the Tisalvers?”
“What of them? I think they’re being very nice.”
“They’re curious.”
“Of course they are. Wouldn’t you be if you were in their place?”
“But is it just curiosity? They seem to be ferociously interested in my meeting with the Emperor.”
Dors seemed impatient. “Again . . . its only natural. Wouldn’t you befit the situation was reversed?”
“It makes me nervous.”
“Hummin brought us here.”
“Yes but he’s not perfect. He brought me to the University and I was maneuvered Upperside. He brought us to Sunmaster Fourteen who entrapped us.
 You know he did. Twice bitten at least once shy. I’m tired of being questioned.”
“Then turn the tables Hari. Aren’t you interested in Dahl?”
“Of course. What do you know about it to begin with?”
“Nothing. It’s just one of more than eight hundred sectors and I’ve only been on Trantor a little over two years.”
“Exactly. And there are twenty-five million other worlds and I’ve been on this problem only a little over two months. -I tell you.
 I want to go back to Helicon and take up a study of the mathematics of turbulence which was my Ph.D. problem and forget I ever saw or thought I saw that turbulence gave an insight into human society.”
But that evening he said to Tisalver “But you know Master Tisalver you’ve never told me what you do the nature of your work.”
“Me?” Tisalver placed his fingers on his chest which was covered by the simple white T-shirt with nothing underneath which seemed to be the standard male uniform in Dahl.
 “Nothing much. I work at the local holovision station in programming. It’s very dull but it’s a living.”
“And it’s respectable ” said Mistress Tisalver. “It means he doesn’t have to work in the heatsinks.”
“The heatsinks?” said Dors lifting her light eyebrows and managing to look fascinated.
“Oh well ” said Tisalver “that’s what Dahl is best known for. It isn’t much but forty billion people on Trantor need energy and we supply a lot of it.
 We don’t get appreciated but I’d like to see some of the fancy sectors do without it.”
Seldon looked confused. “Doesn’t Trantor get its energy from solar power stations in orbit?”
“Some ” said Tisalver “and some from nuclear fusion stations out on the islands and some from microfusion motors and some from wind stations Upperside but half”
 — he raised a finger in emphasis and his face looked unusually grave “half comes from the heatsinks. There are heatsinks in lots of places but none-none- as rich as those in Dahl.
 Are you serious that you don’t know about the heatsinks? You sit there and stare at me.”
Dors said quickly “We are Outworlders you know.” (She had almost said ‘tribespeople ‘ but had caught herself in time.) “Especially Dr.
 Seldon. He’s only been on Trantor a couple of months.”
“Really?” said Mistress Tisalver. She was a trifle shorter than her husband was plump without quite being fat had her dark hair drawn tightly back into a bun and possessed rather beautiful dark eyes.
 Like her husband she appeared to be in her thirties.
(After a period in Mycogen not actually long in duration but intense it struck Dors as odd to have a woman enter the conversation at will.
 How quickly modes and manners establish themselves she thought and made a mental note to mention that to Seldon — one more item for his psychohistory.)
“Oh yes ” she said. “Dr. Seldon is from Helicon.”
Mistress Tisalver registered polite ignorance. “And where might that be?”
Dors said “Why it’s” She turned to Seldon. “Where is it Hari?”
Seldon looked abashed. “To tell you the truth I don’t think I could locate it very easily on a Galactic model without looking up the coordinates.
 All I can say is that it’s on the other side of the central black hole from Trantor and getting there by hypership is rather a chore.”
Mistress Tisalver said “I don’t think Jirad and I will ever be on a hypership.”
“Someday Casilia ” said Tisalver cheerfully “maybe we will. But tell us about Helicon Master Seldon.”
Seldon shook his head. “To me that would be dull. Its just a world like any other. Only Trantor is different from all the rest.
 There are no heatsinks on Heliconor probably anywhere else except Trantor. Tell me about them.”
(”Only Trantor is different from all the rest.” The sentence repeated itself in Seldon’s mind and for a moment he grasped at it and for some reason Dor’
s hand-on-thigh story suddenly recurred to him but Tisalver was speaking and it passed out of Seldon’s mind as quickly as it had entered.)
Tisalver said “If you really want to know about heatsinks I can show you.” He turned to his wife. “Casilia would you mind if tomorrow evening I take Master Seldon to the heatsinks.”
“And me ” said Dors quickly.
“And Mistress Venabili?”
Mistress Tisalver frowned and said sharply “I don’t think it would be a good idea. Our visitors would find it dull.”
“I don’t think so Mistress Tisalver ” said Seldon ingratiatingly. “We would very much like to see the heatsinks. We would be delighted if you would join us too .
 . . and your little daughter-if she wants to come.”
“To the heatsinks?” said Mistress Tisalver stiffening. “It’s no place at all for a decent woman.”
Seldon felt embarrassed at his gaffe. “I meant no harm Mistress Tisalver.”
“No offense ” said Tisalver. “Casilia thinks it’s beneath us and so it is but as long as I don’t work there it’
s no distress merely to visit and show it to guests. But it is uncomfortable and I would never get Casilia to dress properly.”
They got up from their crouching positions. Dahlite “chairs” were merely molded plastic seats on small wheels and they cramped Seldon’s knees terribly and seemed to wiggle at his least body movement.
 The Tisalvers however had mastered the art of sitting firmly and rose without trouble and without needing to use their arms for help as Seldon had to.
 Dors also got up without trouble and Seldon once again marveled at her natural grace.
Before they parted to their separate rooms for the night Seldon said to Dors “Are you sure you know nothing about heatsinks? Mistress Tisalver makes them seem unpleasant.”
“They can’t be that unpleasant or Tisalver wouldn’t suggest taking us on tour. Lets be content to be surprised.”
63.
Tisalver said “You’ll need proper clothing.” Mistress Tisalver sniffed markedly in the background.
Cautiously Seldon thinking of kirtles with vague distress said “What do you mean by proper clothing?”
“Something light such as I wear. A T-shirt very short sleeves loose slacks loose underpants foot socks open sandals. I have it all for you.”
“Good. IL doesn’t sound bad.”
“As for Mistress Venabili I have the same. I hope it fits.”
The clothes Tisalver supplied each of them (which were his own) fit fine-if a bit snugly. When they were ready they bade Mistress Tisalver good-bye and she with a resigned if still disapproving air watched them from the doorway as they set off.
It was early evening and there was an attractive twilight glow above. It was clear that Dahl’s lights would soon be winking on. The temperature was mild and there were virtually no vehicles to be seen;
 everyone was walking. In the distance was the everpresent hum of an Expressway and the occasional glitter of its lights could be easily seen.
The Dahlites Seldon noted did not seem to be walking toward any particular destination. Rather there seemed to be a promenade going on a walking for pleasure.
 Perhaps if Dahl was an impoverished sector as Tisalver had implied inexpensive entertainment was at a premium and what was as pleasantand as inexpensiveas an evening stroll?
Seldon felt himself easing automatically into the gait of an aimless stroll himself and felt the warmth of friendliness a0 around him. People greeted each other as they passed and exchanged a few words.
 Black mustaches of different shape and thickness flashed everywhere and seemed a requisite for the Dahlite male as ubiquitous as the bald heads of the Mycogenian Brothers.
It was an evening rite a way of making sure that another day had passed safely and that one’s friends were still well and happy.
 And it soon became apparent Dors caught every eye. In the twilight glow the ruddiness of her hair had deepened but it stood out against the sea of black-haired heads (except for the occasional gray)
 like a gold coin winking its way across a pile of coal.
“This is very pleasant ” said Seldon.
“It is ” said Tisalver. “Ordinarily I’d be walking with my wife and she’d be in her element. There is no one for a kilometer around whom she doesn’
t know by name occupation and interrelationships. I can’t do that. Right now half the people who greet me . . . I couldn’
t tell you their names. But in any case we mustn’t creep along too slowly. We must get to the elevator. It’s a busy world on the lower levels.”
They were on the elevator going down when Dors said “I presume Master Tisalver that the heatsinks are places where the internal heat of Trantor is being used to produce steam that will turn turbines and produce electricity.”
“Oh no. Highly efficient large-scale thermopiles produce electricity directly. Don’t ask me the details please. I’m just a holovision programmer. In fact don’
t ask anyone the details down there. The whole thing is one big black box. It works but no one knows how.”
“What if something goes wrong?”
“It doesn’t usually but if it does some expert comes over from somewhere. Someone who understands computers. The whole thing is highly computerized of course.”
The elevator came to a halt and they stepped out. A blast of heat struck them.
“It’s hot ” said Seldon quite unnecessarily.
“Yes it is ” said Tisalver. “That’s what makes Dahl so valuable as an energy source. The magma layer is nearer the surface here than it is anywhere else in the world.
 So you have to work in the heat.”
“How about air-conditioning?” said Dors.
“There is air-conditioning but it’s a matter of expense. We ventilate and dehumidify and cool but if we go too far then we’
re using up too much energy and the whole process becomes too expensive.”
Tisalver stopped at a door at which he signaled. It opened to a blast of cooler air and he muttered “We ought to be able to get someone to help show us around and he’
ll control the remarks that Mistress Venabili will otherwise be the victim of . . . at least from the men.”
“Remarks won’t embarrass me ” said Dors.
“They will embarrass me ” said Tisalver.
A young man walked out of the office and introduced himself as Hano Linder. He resembled Tisalver quite closely but Seldon decided that until he got used to the almost universal shortness swarthiness black hair and luxuriant mustaches he would not be able to see individual differences easily.
Lindor said “I’ll be glad to show you around for what there is to see. It’s not one of your spectaculars you know.
” He addressed them all but his eyes were fixed on Dors. He said “It’s not going to be comfortable. I suggest we remove our shirts.”
“It’s nice and cool in here ” said Seldon.
“Of course but that’s because we’re executives. Rank has its privileges. Out there we can’t maintain air-conditioning at this level.
 That’s why they get paid more than I do. In fact those are the best-paying jobs in Dahl which is the only reason we get people to work down here.
 Even so it’s getting harder to get heatsinkers all the time.” He took a deep breath. “Okay out into the soup.”
He removed his own shirt and tucked it into his waistband. Tisalver did the same and Seldon followed suit.
Linder glanced at Dors and said “For your own comfort Mistress but it’s not compulsory.”
“That’s all right ” said Dors and removed her shirt.
Her brassiere was white unpadded and showed considerable cleavage.
“Mistress ” said Lindor “That’s not” He thought a moment then shrugged and said “All right. We’ll get by.”
At first Seldon was aware only of computers and machinery huge pipes flickering lights and flashing screens.
The overall light was comparatively dim though individual sections of machinery were illuminated. Seldon looked up into the almost-darkness. He said “Why isn’t it better lit?”
“It’s lit well enough . . . where it should be ” said Lindor. His voice was well modulated and he spoke quickly but a little harshly.
 “Overall illumination is kept low for psychological reasons. Too bright is translated in the mind into heat. Complaints go up when we turn up the lights even when the temperature is made to go down.”
Dors said “It seems to be well computerized. I should think the operations could be turned over to computers altogether. This sort of environment is made for artificial intelligence.”
“Perfectly right ” said Lindor “but neither can we take a chance on any failures. We need people on the spot if anything goes wrong.
 A misfunctioning computer can raise problems up to two thousand kilometers away.”
“So can human error. Isn’t that so?” said Seldon.
“Oh yes but with both people and computers on the job computer error can be more quickly tracked down and corrected by people and conversely human error can be more quickly corrected by computers.
 What it amounts to is that nothing serious can happen unless human error and computer error take place simultaneously. And that hardly ever happens.”
“Hardly ever but not never eh?” said Seldon.
“Almost never but not never. Computers aren’t what they used to be and neither are people.”
“That’s the way it always seems ” said Seldon laughing slightly.
“No no. I’m not talking memory. I’m not talking good old days. I’m talking statistics.”
At this Seldon recalled Hummin talking of the degeneration of the times.
“See what I mean?” said Lindor his voice dropping. “There’s a bunch of people at the C-3 level from the looks of them drinking.
 Not one of them is at his or her post.”
“What are they drinking?” asked Dors.
“Special fluids for replacing electrolyte loss. Fruit juice.”
“You can’t blame them can you?” said Dors indignantly. “In this dry heat you would have to drink.”
“Do you know how long a skilled C-3 can spin out a drink? And there’s nothing to be done about it either. If we give them fiveminute breaks for drinks and stagger them so they don’
t all congregate in a group you simply stir up a rebellion.”
They were approaching the group now. There were men and women (Dahl seemed to be a more or less amphisexual society) and both sexes were shirtless.
 The women wore devices that might be called brassieres but they were strictly functional. They served to lift the breasts in order to improve ventilation and limit perspiration but covered nothing.
Dors said in an aside to Seldon “That makes sense Hari. I’m soaking wet there.”
“Take off your brassiere then ” said Seldon. “I won’t lift a finger to stop you.”
“Somehow ” said Dors “I guessed you wouldn’t.” She left her brassiere where it was.
They were approaching the congregation of people-about a dozen of them.
Dors said “If any of them make rude remarks I shall survive.”
“Thank you ” said Lindor. “I cannot promise they won’t. but I’ll have to introduce you. If they get the idea that you two are inspectors and in my company they’
ll become unruly. Inspectors are supposed to poke around on their own without anyone from management overseeing them.”
He held up his arms. “Heatsinkers I have two introductions to make. We have visitors from outside-two Outworlders two scholars. They’ve got worlds running short on energy and they’
ve come here to see how we do it here in Dahl. They think they may learn something.”
“They’ll learn how to sweat!” shouted a heatsinker and there was raucous laughter.
“She’s got a sweaty chest right now ” shouted a woman “covering up like that.”
Dors shouted back “I’d take it off but mine can’t compete with yours.” The laughter turned good-natured.
But one young man stepped forward staring at Seldon with intense deep-set eyes his face set into a humorless mask. He said “I know you. You’re the mathematician.”
He ran forward inspecting Seldon’s face with eager solemnity. Automatically Dors stepped in front of Seldon and Lindor stepped in front of her shouting “Back heatsinker. Mind your manners.”
Seldon said “Wait! Let him talk to me. Why is everyone piling in front of me?”
Lindor said in a low voice “If any of them get close you’ll find they don’t smell like hothouse flowers.”
“I’ll endure it ” said Seldon brusquely. “Young man what is it you want?”
“My name is Amaryl. Yugo Amaryl. I’ve seen you on holovision.”
“You might have but what about it?”
“I don’t remember your name.”
“You don’t have to.”
“You talked about something called psychohistory.”
“You don’t know how I wish I hadn’t.”
“What?”
“Nothing. What is it you want?”
“I want to talk to you. Just for a little while. Now.”
Seldon looked at Lindor who shook his head firmly. “Not while he’s on his shift.”
“When does your shift begin Mr. Amaryl?” asked Seldon.
“Sixteen hundred.”
“Can you see me tomorrow at fourteen hundred?”
“Sure. Where?”
Seldon turned to Tisalver. Would you permit me to see him in your place?”
Tisalver looked very unhappy. “Its not necessary. He’s just a heatsinker.”
Seldon said “He recognized my face. He knows something about me. He can’t be just an anything. I’ll see him in my room.
” And then as Tisalver’s face didn’t soften he added “My room for which rent is being paid. And you’ll be at work out of the apartment.”
Tisalver said in a low voice “It’s not me Master Seldon. It’s my wife Casilia. She won’t stand for it.”
“I’ll talk to her ” said Seldon grimly. “She’ll have to.”
64.
Casilia Tisalver opened her eyes wide. “A heatsinker? Not in my apartment.”
“Why not? Besides he’ll be coming to my room ” said Seldon. “At fourteen hundred.”
“I won’t have it ” said Mistress Tisalver. “This is what comes of going down to the heatsinks. Jirad was a fool.”
“Not at all Mistress Tisalver. We went at my request and I was fascinated. I must see this young man since that is necessary to my scholarly work.”
“I’m sorry if it is but I won’t have it.”
Dors Venabili raised her hand. “Hari let me take care of this. Mistress Tisalver if Dr. Seldon must see someone in his room this afternoon the additional person naturally means additional rent.
 We understand that. For today then the rent on Dr. Seldon’s room will be doubled.”
Mistress Tisalver thought about it. “Well that’s decent of you but it’s not only the credits. There’s the neighbours to think of. A sweaty smelly heatsinker“
“I doubt that he’ll be sweaty and smelly at fourteen hundred Mistress Tisalver but let me go on. Since Dr. Seldon must see him then if he can’
t see him here he’ll have to see him elsewhere but we can’t run here and there. That would be too inconvenient. Therefore what we will have to do is to get a room elsewhere.
 It won’t be easy and we don’t want to do it but we will have to. So we will pay the rent through today and leave and of course we will have to explain to Master Hummin why we have had to change the arrangements that he so kindly made for us.”
“Wait.” Mistress Tisalver’s face became a study of calculation. “We wouldn’t like to disoblige Master Hummin . . . or you two.
 How long would this creature have to stay?”
“He’s coming at fourteen hundred. He must be at work at sixteen hundred. He will be here for less than two hours perhaps considerably less.
 We will meet him outside the two of us and bring him to Dr. Seldon’s room. Any neighbours who see us will think he is an Outworlder friend of ours.”
Mistress Tisalver nodded her head. “Then let it be as you say. Double rent for Master Seldon’s room for today and the heatsinker will visit just this one time.”
“Just this one time ” said Dors.
But later when Seldon and Dors were sitting in her room Dors said “Why do you have to see him Hari? Is interviewing a heatsinker important to psychohistory too?”
Seldon thought he detected a small edge of sarcasm in her voice and he said tartly “I don’t have to base everything on this huge project of mine in which I have very little faith anyway.
 I am also a human being with human curiosities. We were down in the heatsinks for hours and you saw what the working people there were like.
 They were obviously uneducated. They were low-level individuals-no play on words intended and yet here was one who recognized me. He must have seen me on holovision on the occasion of the Decennial Convention and he remembered the word ‘psychohistory.
’ He strikes me as unusualas out of place somehow and I would like to talk to him.”
“Because it pleases your vanity to have become known even to heatsinkers in Dahl?”
“Well . . . perhaps. But it also piques my curiosity.”
“And how do you know he hasn’t been briefed and intends to lead you into trouble as has happened before.”
Seldon winced. “I won’t let him run his fingers through my hair. In any case we’re more nearly prepared now aren’t we?
 And I’m sure you’ll be with me. I mean you let me go Upperside alone you let me go with Raindrop Forty-Three to the microfarms alone and you’
re not going to do that again are you?”
“You can be absolutely sure I won’t ” said Dors.
“Well then I’ll talk to the young man and you can watch out for traps. I have every faith in you.”
65.
Amaryl arrived a few minutes before 1400 looking warily about. His hair was neat and his thick mustache was combed and turned up slightly at the edges.
 His T-shirt was startlingly white. He did smell but it was a fruity odor that undoubtedly came from the slightly overenthusiastic use of scent. He had a bag with him.
Seldon who had been waiting outside for him seized one elbow lightly while Dors seized the other and they moved rapidly into the elevator. Having reached the correct level they passed through the apartment into Seldon’s room.
Amaryl said in a low hangdog voice “Nobody home huh?”
“Everyone’s busy ” said Seldon neutrally. He indicated the only chair in the room a pad directly on the floor.
“No ” said Amaryl. “I don’t need that. One of you two use it.” He squatted on the floor with a graceful downward motion.
Dors imitated the movement sitting on the edge of Seldon’s floorbased mattress but Seldon dropped down rather clumsily having to make use of his hands and unable quite to find a comfortable position for his legs.
Seldon said “Well young man why do you want to see me?”
“Because you’re a mathematician. You’re the first mathematician I ever saw-close up-so I could touch him you know.”
“Mathematicians feel like anyone else.”
“Not to me Dr . . . . Dr. . . . Seldon?”
“That’s my name.”
Amaryl looked pleased. “I finally remembered. -You see I want to be a mathematician too.”
“Very good. What’s stopping you?”
Amaryl suddenly frowned. “Are you serious?”
“I presume something is stopping you. Yes I’m serious.”
“What’s stopping me is I’m a Dahlite a heatsinker on Dahl. I don’t have the money to get an education and I can’
t get the credits to get an education. A real education I mean. All they taught me was to read and cipher and use a computer and then I knew enough to be a heatsinker.
 But I wanted more. So I taught myself.”
“In some ways that’s the best kind of teaching. How did you do that?”
“I knew a librarian. She was willing to help me. She was a very nice woman and she showed me how to use computers for learning mathematics.
 And she set up a software system that would connect me with other libraries. I’d come on my days off and on mornings after my shift.
 Sometimes she’d lock me in her private room so I wouldn’t be bothered by people coming in or she would let me in when the library was closed.
 She didn’t know mathematics herself but she helped me all she could. She was oldish a widow lady. Maybe she thought of me as a kind of son or something.
 She didn’t have children of her own.”
(Maybe thought Seldon briefly there was some other emotion involved too but he put the thought away. None of his business.)
“I liked number theory ” said Amaryl. “I worked some things out from what I learned from the computer and from the bookfilms it used to teach me mathematics.
 I came up with some new things that weren’t in the book-films.”
Seldon raised his eyebrows. “That’s interesting. Like what?”
“I’ve brought some of them to you. I’ve never showed them to anyone. The people around me” He shrugged. “They’d either laugh or be annoyed.
 Once I tried to tell a girl I knew but she just said I was weird and wouldn’t see me anymore. Is it all right for me to show them to you?”
“Quite all right. Believe me.”
Seldon held out his hand and after a brief hesitation Amaryl handed him the bag he was carrying.
For a long time Seldon looked over Amaryl’s papers. The work was naive in the extreme but he allowed no smile to cross his face.
 He followed the demonstrations not one of which was new of courseor even nearly newor of any importance.
But that didn’t matter.
Seldon looked up. “Did you do all of this yourself?”
Amaryl looking more than half-frightened nodded his head.
Seldon extracted several sheets. “What made you think of this?” His finger ran down a line of mathematical reasoning.
Amaryl looked it over frowned and thought about it. Then he explained his line of thinking.
Seldon listened and said “Did you ever read a book by Anat Bigell?”
“On number theory?”
“The title was Mathematical Deduction. It wasn’t about number theory particularly.”
Amaryl shook his head. “I never heard of him. I’m sorry.”
“He worked out this theorem of yours three hundred years ago.’
Amaryl looked stricken. “I didn’t know that.”
“I’m sure you didn’t. You did it more cleverly though. It’s not rigorous but“
“What do you mean ‘rigorous’?”
“It doesn’t matter.” Seldon put the papers back together in a sheaf restored it to the bag and said “Make several copies of all this.
 Take one copy have it dated by an official computer and place it under computerized seal. My friend here Mistress Venabili can get you into Streeling University without tuition on some sort of scholarship.
 You’ll have to start at the beginning and take courses in other subjects than mathematics but-
By now Amaryl had caught his breath. “Into Streeling University? They won’t take me.”
“Why not? Dors you can arrange it can’t you?”
“I’m sure I can.”
“No you can’t ” said Amaryl hotly. “They won’t take me. I’m from Dahl.”
“Well?”
“They won’t take people from Dahl.”
Seldon looked at Dors. “What’s he talking about?”
Dors shook her head. “I really don’t know.”
Amaryl said “You’re an Outworlder Mistress. How long have you been at Streeling?”
“A little over two years Mr. Amaryl.”
“Have you ever seen Dahlites there-short curly black hair big mustaches?”
“There are students with all kinds of appearances.”
“But no Dahlites. Look again the next time you’re there.”
“Why not?” said Seldon.
“They don’t like us. We look different. They don’t like our mustaches.”
“You can shave your” but Seldon’s voice died under the other’s furious glance.
“Never. Why should I? My mustache is my manhood.”
“You shave your beard. That’s your manhood too.”
“To my people it is the mustache.”
Seldon looked at Dors again and murmured “Bald heads mustaches . . . madness.”
“What?” said Amaryl angrily.
“Nothing. Tell me what else they don’t like about Dahlites.”
“They make up things not to like. They say we smell. They say we’re dirty. They say we steal. They say we’
re violent. They say we’re dumb. “
“Why do they say all this?”
“Because its easy to say it and it makes them feel good. Sure if we work in the heatsinks we get dirty and smelly. If we’
re poor and held down some of us steal and get violent. But that isn’t the way it is with all of us. How about those tall yellow-hairs in the Imperial Sector who think they own the Galaxy-no they do own the Galaxy.
 Don’t they ever get violent? Don’t they steal sometimes? If they did my job they’d smell the way I do. If they had to live the way I have to they’d get dirty too.”
“Who denies that there are people of all kinds in all places?” said Seldon.
“No one argues the matter! They just take it for granted. Master Seldon I’ve got to get away from Trantor. I have no chance on Trantor no way of earning credits no way of getting an education no way of becoming a mathematician no way of becoming any thing but what they say I am .
 . . a worthless nothing.” This last was said in frustrationand desperation.
Seldon tried to be reasonable. “The person I’m renting this room from is a Dahlite. He has a clean job. He’s educated.”
“Oh sure ” said Amaryl passionately. “There are some. They let a few do it so that they can say it can be done.
 And those few can live nicely as long as they stay in Dahl. Let them go outside and they’ll see how they’re treated.
 And while they’re in here they make themselves feel good by treating the rest of us like dirt. That makes them yellow-hairs in their own eyes.
 What did this nice person you’re renting this room from say when you told him you were bringing in a heatsinker? What did he say I would be like?
 They’re gone now . . . wouldn’t be in the same place with me.”
Seldon moistened his lips. “I won’t forget you. I’ll see to it that you’ll get off Trantor and into my own University in Helicon once I’m back there myself.”
“Do you promise that? Your word of honor? Even though I’m a Dahlite?”
“The fact that you’re a Dahlite is unimportant to me. The fact that you are already a mathematician is! But I still can’
t quite grasp what you’re telling me. I find it impossible to believe that there would be such unreasoning feeling against harmless people.”
Amaryl said bitterly “That’s because you’ve never had any occasion to interest yourself in such things. It ran all pass right under your nose and you wouldn’
t smell a thing because it doesn’t affect you. “
Dors said “Mr. Amaryl Dr. Seldon is a mathematician like you and his head can sometimes be in the clouds. You must understand that.
 I am a historian however. I know that it isn’t unusual to have one group of people look down upon another group. There are peculiar and almost ritualistic hatreds that have no rational justification and that can have their serious historical influence. It’s too bad.”
Amaryl said “Saying something is ‘too bad’ is easy. You say you disapprove which makes you a nice person and then you can go about your own business and not be interested anymore.
 It’s a lot worse than ‘too bad.’ It’s against everything decent and natural. We’re all of us the same yellow-hairs and black-hairs tall and short Easterners Westerners Southerners and Outworlders.
 We’re all of us you and I and even the Emperor descended from the people of Earth aren’t we?”
“Descended from what” asked Seldon. He turned to look at Dors his eyes wide.
“From the people of Earth!” shouted Amaryl. “The one planet on which human beings originated.”
“One planet? Just one planet?”
“The only planet. Sure. Earth.”
“When you say Earth you mean Aurora don’t you?”
“Aurora? What’s that? -I mean Earth. Have you never heard of Earth?”
“No ” said Seldon. “Actually not.”
“It’s a mythical world ” began Dors “that“
“It’s not mythical. It was a real planet.”
Seldon sighed. “I’ve heard this all before. Well let’s go through it again. Is there a Dahlite book that tells of Earth?”
“What?”
“Some computer software then?”
“I don’t know what you’re talking about.”
“Young man where did you hear about Earth?”
“My dad told me. Everyone knows about it.”
“Is there anyone who knows about it especially? Did they teach you about it in school?”
“They never said a word about it there.”
“Then how do people know about it?”
Amaryl shrugged his shoulders with an air of being uselessly badgered over nothing. “Everyone just does. If you want stories about it there’s Mother Rittah.
 I haven’t heard that she’s died yet.”
“Your mother? Wouldn’t you know“
“She’s not my mother. That’s just what they call her. Mother Rittah. She’s an old woman. She lives in Billibotton. Or used to.”
“Where’s that?”
“Down in that direction ” said Amaryl gesturing vaguely.
“How do I get there?”
“Get there? You don’t want to get there. You’d never come back.”
“Why not?”
“Believe me. You don’t want to go there.”
“But I’d like to see Mother Rittah.”
Amaryl shook his head. “Can you use a knife?”
“For what purpose? What kind of knife?”
“A cutting knife. Like this.” Amaryl reached down to the belt that held his pants tight about his waist. A section of it came away and from one end there flashed out a knife blade thin gleaming and deadly.
Dors’s hand immediately came down hard upon his right wrist.
Amaryl laughed. “I wasn’t planning to use it. I was just showing it to you.” He put the knife back in his belt.
 “You need one in selfdefense and if you don’t have one or if you have one but don’t know how to use it you’
ll never get out of Billibotton alive. Anyway”-he suddenly grew very grave and intent“are you really serious Master Seldon about helping me get to Helicon?”
“Entirely serious. That’s a promise. Write down your name and where you can be reached by hypercomputer. You have a code I suppose.”
“My shift in the heatsinks has one. Will that do?”
“Yes.”
“Well then ” said Amaryl looking up earnestly at Seldon “this means I have my whole future riding on you Master Seldon so please don’
t go to Billibotton. I can’t afford to lose you now.” He turned beseeching eyes on Dors and said softly “Mistress Venabili if he’
ll listen to you don’t let him go. Please. “
Billibotton
DAHL- . . . Oddly enough the best-known aspect of this sector is Billibotton a semi-legendary place about which innumerable tales have grown up.
 In fact a whole branch of literature now exists in which heroes and adventurers (and victims) must dare the dangers of passing through Billibotton.
 So stylized have these stories become that the one well-known and presumably authentic tale involving such a passage that of Hari Seldon and Dors Venabili has come to seem fantastic simply by association . . .
ENCYCLOPEDIA GALACTICA
66.
When Hari Seldon and Dors Venabili were alone Dors asked thoughtfully “Are you really planning to see this ‘Mother’ woman?”
“I’m thinking about it Dors.”
“You’re an odd one Hari. You seem to go steadily from bad to worse. You went Upperside which seemed harmless enough for a rational purpose when you were in Streeling.
 Then in Mycogen you broke into the Elders’ aerie a much more dangerous task for a much more foolish purpose. And now in Dahl you want to go to this place which that young man seems to think is simple suicide for something altogether nonsensical.”
“I’m curious about this reference to Earthand must know if there’s anything to it.”
Dors said “It’s a legend and not even an interesting one. It is routine. The names differ from planet to planet but the content is the same.
 There is always the tale of an original world and a golden age. There is a longing for a supposedly simple and virtuous past that is almost universal among the people of a complex and vicious society.
 In one way or another this is true of all societies since everyone imagines his or her own society to be too complex and vicious however simple it may be. Mark that down for your psychohistory.”
“Just the same ” said Seldon “I have to consider the possibility that one world did once exist. Aurora . . . Earth . .
 . the name doesn’t matter. In fact“
He paused and finally Dors said “Well?”
Seldon shook his head. “Do you remember the hand-on-thigh story you told me in Mycogen? It was right after I got the Book from Raindrop Forty-Three .
 . . Well it popped into my head one evening recently when we were talking to the Tisalvers. I said something that reminded me for an instant“
“Reminded you of what?”
“I don’t remember. It came into my head and went out again but somehow every time I think of the single-world notion it seems to me I have the tips of my fingers on something and then lose it.”
Dors looked at Seldon in surprise. “I don’t see what it could be. The hand-on-thigh story has nothing to do with Earth or Aurora.”
“I know but this . . . thing . . . that hovers just past the edge of my mind seems to be connected with this single world anyway and I have the feeling that I must find out more about it at any cost. That . . . and robots.”
“Robots too? I thought the Elders’ aerie put an end to that.”
“Not at all. I’ve been thinking about them.” He stared at Dors with a troubled look on his fare for a long moment then said “But I’m not sure.”
“Sure about what Hari?”
But Seldon merely shook his head and said nothing more.
Dors frowned then said “Hari let me tell you one thing. In sober history-and believe me I know what I’m talking about there is no mention of one world of origin.
 It’s a popular belief I admit. I don’t mean just among the unsophisticated followers of folklore like the Mycogenians and the Dahlite heatsinkers but there are biologists who insist that there must have been one world of origin for reasons that are well outside my area of expertise and there are the more mystical historians who tend to speculate about it.
 And among the leisure-class intellectuals I understand such speculations are becoming fashionable. Still scholarly history knows nothing about it.”
Seldon said “All the more reason perhaps to go beyond scholarly history. All I want is a device that will simplify psychohistory for me and I don’
t care what the device is whether it is a mathematical trick or a historical trick or something totally imaginary. If the young man we’
ve just talked to had had a little more formal training I’d have set him on the problem. His thinking is marked by considerable ingenuity and originality“
Dors said “And you’re really going to help him then?”
“Absolutely. Just as soon as I’m in a position to.”
“But ought you to make promises you’re not sure you’ll be able to keep?”
“I want to keep it. If you’re that stiff about impossible promises consider that Hummin told Sunmaster Fourteen that I’d use psychohistory to get the Mycogenians their world back.
 There’s just about zero chance of that Even if I work out psychohistory who knows if it can be used for so narrow and specialized a purpose?
 There’s a real case of promising what one can’t deliver.”
But Dors said with some heat “Chetter Hummin was trying to save our lives to keep us out of the hands of Demerzel and the Emperor.
 Don’t forget that. And I think he really would like to help the Mycogenians.”
“And I really would like to help Yugo Amaryl and I am far more likely to be able to help him than I am the Mycogenians so if you justify the second please don’
t criticize the first. What’s more Dors”and his eyes flashed angrily“I really would like to find Mother Rittah and I’m prepared to go alone.”
“Never!” snapped Dors. “If you go I go.”
67.
Mistress Tisalver returned with her daughter in tow an hour after Amaryl had left on this way to his shift. She said nothing at all to either Seldon or Dors but gave a curt nod of her head when they greeted her and gazed sharply about the room as though to verify that the heatsinker had left no trace.
 She then sniffed the air sharply and looked at Seldon accusingly before marching through the common room into the family bedroom.
Tisalver himself arrived home later and when Seldon and Dors came to the dinner table Tisalver took advantage of the fact that his wife was still ordering some last-minute details in connection with the dinner to say in a low voice “Has that person been here?”
“And gone ” said Seldon solemnly. “Your wife was out at the time.”
Tisalver nodded and said “Will you have to do this again?”
“I don’t think so ” said Seldon.
“Good.”
Dinner passed largely in silence but afterward when the daughter had gone to her room for the dubious pleasures of computer practice Seldon leaned back and said “Tell me about Billibotton.”
Tisalver looked astonished and his mouth moved without any sound issuing. Casilia however was less easily rendered speechless.
She said “Is that where your new friend lives? Are you going to return the visit?”
“So far ” said Seldon quietly “I have just asked about Billibotton.”
Casilia said sharply “It is a slum. The dregs live there. No one goes there except the filth that make their homes there.”
“I understand a Mother Rittah lives there.”
“I never heard of her ” said Casilia her mouth closing with a snap. It was quite clear that she had no intention of knowing anyone by name who lived in Billibotton.
Tisalver casting an uneasy look at his wife said “I’ve heard of her. She’s a crazy old woman who is supposed to tell fortunes.”
“And does she live in Billibotton?”
“I don’t know Master Seldon. I’ve never seen her. She’s mentioned sometimes in the news holocasts when she makes her predictions.”
“Do they come true?”
Tisalver snorted. “Do predictions ever come true? Hers don’t even make sense.”
“Does she ever talk about Earth?”
“I don’t know. I wouldn’t be surprised.”
“The mention of Earth doesn’t puzzle you. Do you know about Earth?”
Now Tisalver looked surprised. “Certainly Master Seldon. It’s the world all people came from . . . supposedly.”
“Supposedly? Don’t you believe it?”
“Me? I’m educated. But many ignorant people believe it.”
“Are there book-films about Earth?”
“Children’s stories sometimes mention Earth. I remember when I was a young boy my favorite story began ‘Once long ago on Earth when Earth was the only planet-’ Remember Casilia? You liked it too.”
Casilia shrugged unwilling to bend as yet.
“I’d like to see it sometime ” said Seldon “but I mean real bookfilms . . . uh . . . learned ones .
 . . or films . . . or printouts.”
“I never heard of any but the library“
“I’ll try that. -Are there any taboos about speaking of Earth?”
“What are taboos?”
“I mean is it a strong custom that people mustn’t talk of Earth or that outsiders mustn’t ask about it?”
Tisalver looked so honestly astonished that there seemed no point in waiting for an answer.
Dors put in “Is there some rule about outsiders not going to Billibotton?”
Now Tisalver turned earnest. “No rule but it’s not a good idea for anyone to go there. 7 wouldn’t.”
Dors said “Why not?”
“It’s dangerous. Violent! Everyone is armed. -I mean Dahl is an armed place anyway but in Billibotton they use the weapons. Stay in this neighborhood. It’s safe.”
“So far ” said Casilia darkly. “It would be better if we left altogether. Heatsinkers go anywhere these days.” And there was another lowering look in Seldon’s direction.
Seldon said “What do you mean that Dahl is an armed place? There are strong Imperial regulations against weapons.”
“I know that ” said Tisalver “and there are no stun guns here or percussives or Psychic Probes or anything like that. But there are knives.” He looked embarrassed.
Dors said “Do you carry a knife Tisalver?”
“Me?” He looked genuinely horrified. “I am a man of peace and this is a safe neighborhood.”
“We have a couple of them in the house ” said Casilia sniffing again. “We’re not that certain this is a safe neighborhood.”
“Does everyone carry knives?” asked Dors.
“Almost everyone Mistress Venabili ” said Tisalver. “It’s customary. But that doesn’t mean everyone uses them.”
“But they use them in Billibotton I suppose ” said Dors.
“Sometimes. When they’re excited they have fights.”
“And the government permits it? The Imperial government I mean?”
“Sometimes they try to clean Billibotton up but knives are too easy to hide and the custom is too strong. Besides it’s almost always Dahlites that get killed and I don’
t think the Imperial government gets too upset over that.”
“What if it’s an outsider who gets killed?”
“If it’s reported the Imperials could get excited. But what happens is that no one has seen anything and no one knows anything. The Imperials sometimes round up people on general principles but they can never prove anything.
 I suppose they decide it’s the outsiders’ fault for being there. -So don’t go to Billibotton even if you have a knife.”
Seldon shook his head rather pettishly. “I wouldn’t carry a knife. I don’t know how to use one. Not skillfully.”
“Then it’s simple Master Seldon. Stay out.” Tisalver shook his head portentously. “Just stay out.”
“I may not be able to do that either ” said Seldon.
Dors glared at him clearly annoyed and said to Tisalver “Where does one buy a knife? Or may we have one of yours?”
Casilia said quickly “No one takes someone else’s knife. You must buy your own.”
Tisalver said “There are knife stores all over. There aren’t supposed to be. Theoretically they’re illegal you know. Any appliance store sells them however.
 If you see a washing machine on display that’s a sure sign.”
“And how does one get to Billibotton?” asked Seldon.
“By Expressway.” Tisalver looked dubious as he looked at Dors’s frowning expression.
Seldon said “And once I reach the Expressway?”
“Get on the eastbound side and watch for the signs. But if you must go Master Seldon”-Tisalver hesitated then said“you mustn’t take Mistress Venabili.
 Women sometimes are treated . . . worse.”
“She won’t go ” said Seldon.
“I’m afraid she will ” said Dors with quiet determination.
68.
The appliance store dealer’s mustache was clearly as lush as it had been in his younger days but it was grizzled now even though the hair on his head was still black.
 He touched the mustache out of sheer habit as he gazed at Dors and brushed it back on each side.
He said “You’re not a Dahlite.”
“Yes but I still want a knife.”
He said “It’s against the law to sell knives.”
Dors said “I’m not a policewoman or a government agent of any soft. I’m going to Billibotton.”
He stared at her thoughtfully. “Alone?”
“With my friend.” She jerked her thumb over her shoulder in the direction of Seldon who was waiting outside sullenly.
“You’re buying it for him?” He stared at Seldon and it didn’t take him long to decide. “He’s an outsider too.
 Let him come in and buy it for himself”
“He’s not a government agent either. And I’m buying it for myself.”
The dealer shook his head. “Outsiders are crazy. But if you want to spend some credits I’ll take them from you. He reached under the counter brought out a stub turned it with a slight and expert motion and the knife blade emerged.
“Is that the largest you have?”
“Best woman’s knife made.”
“Show me a man’s knife.”
“You don’t want one that’s coo heavy. Do you know how to use one of these things?”
“I’ll learn and I’m not worried about heavy. Show me a man’s knife.”
The dealer smiled. “Well if you want to see one” He moved farther down the counter and brought up a much fatter stub. He gave it a twist and what appeared to be a butcher’s knife emerged.
He handed it to her handle first still smiling.
She said “Show me that twist of yours.”
He showed her on a second knife slowly twisting one way to make the blade appear then the other way to make it disappear. “Twist and squeeze ” he said.
“Do it again sir.”
The dealer obliged.
Dors said “All right close it and toss me the haft”
He did in a slow upward loop.
She caught it handed it back and said “Faster.”
He raised his eyebrows and then without warning backhanded it to her left side. She made no attempt to bring over her right hand but caught it with her left and the blade showed tumescently at once-then disappeared. The dealer’s mouth fell open.
“And this is the largest you have?” she said.
“It is. If you try to use it it will just tire you out.”
“I’ll breathe deeply. I’ll take a second one too.”
“For your friend?”
“No. For me.”
“You plan on using two knives?”
“I’ve got two hands.”
The dealer sighed. “Mistress please stay out of Billibotton. You don’t know what they do to women there.”
“I can guess. How do I put these knives on my belt?”
“Not the one you’ve got on Mistress. That’s not a knife belt. I can sell you one though.”
“Will it hold two knives?”
“I might have a double belt somewhere. Not much call for them.”
“I’m calling for them.”
“I may not have it in your size.”
“Then we’ll cut it down or something.”
“It will cost you a lot of credits.”
“My credit tile will cover it.”
When she emerged at last Seldon said sourly “You look ridiculous with that bulky belt.”
“Really Hari? Too ridiculous to go with you to Billibotton? Then let’s both go back to the apartment.”
“No. I’ll go on by myself. I’ll be safer by myself.”
Dors said “There is no use saying that Hari. We both go back or we both go forward. Under no circumstances do we separate.”
And somehow the firm look in her blue eyes the set to her lips and the manner in which her hands had dropped to the hafts at her belt convinced Seldon she was serious.
“Very well ” he said “but if you survive and if I ever see Hummin again my price for continuing to work on psychohistory much as I have grown fond of you-will be your removal. Do you understand?”
And suddenly Dors smiled. “Forget it. Don’t practice your chivalry on me. Nothing will remove me. Do you understand?”
69.
They got off the Expressway where the sign flickering in the air said: BILLIBOTTON. As perhaps an indication of what might be expected the second I was smeared a mere blob of fainter light.
They made their way out of the car and down to the walkway below. It was early afternoon and at first glance Billibotton seemed much like the part of Dahl they had left.
The air however had a pungent aroma and the walkway was littered with crash. One could tell that auto-sweeps were not to 6e found in the neighborhood.
And although the walkway looked ordinary enough the atmosphere was uncomfortable and as tense as a too-tightly coiled spring.
Perhaps it was the people. There seemed the normal number of pedestrians but they were not like pedestrians elsewhere Seldon thought. Ordinarily in the press of business pedestrians were self-absorbed and in the endless crowds on the endless thoroughfares of Trantor people could only survive-psychologically-by ignoring each other.
 Eyes slid away. Brains were closed off. There was an artificial privacy with each person enclosed in a velvet fog of his or her own making.
 Or there was the ritualistic friendliness of an evening promenade in those neighborhoods that indulged in such things.
But here in Billibotton these was neither friendliness nor neutral withdrawal. At least not where outsiders were concerned. Every person who passed moving in either direction turned to stare at Seldon and Dors.
 Every pair of eyes as though attached by invisible cords to the two outsiders followed them with ill will.
The clothing of the Billibottoners tended to be smudged old and sometimes corn. There was a patina of ill-washed poverty over them and Seldon felt uneasy at the slickness of his own new clothes.
He said “Where in Billibotton does Mother Rittah live do you suppose?”
“I don’t know ” said Dors. “You brought us here so you do the supposing. I intend to confine myself to the task of protection and I think I’
m going to find it necessary to do just that.”
Seldon said “I assumed it would only be necessary to ask the way of any passerby but somehow I’m not encouraged to do so.”
“I don’t blame you. I don’t think you’ll find anyone springing w your assistance.”
“On the other hand there are such things as youngsters.” He indicated one with a brief gesture of one hand. A boy who looked to be about twelve-in any case young enough to lack the universal adult male mustache had come to a full halt and was staring at them.
Dors said “You’re guessing that a boy that age has not yet developed the full Billibottonian dislike of outsiders.”
“At any rate ” said Seldon “I’m guessing he is scarcely large enough to have developed the full Billibottonian penchant for violence. I suppose he might run away and shout insults from a distance if we approach him but I doubt he’ll attack us.”
Seldon raised his voice. “Young man.”
The boy took a step backward and continued to stare.
Seldon said “Come here ” and beckoned.
The boy said “Wa’ fox guy?”
“So I can ask you directions. Come closer so I don’t have to shout.”
The boy approached two steps closer. His face was smudged but his eyes were bright and sharp. His sandals were of different make and there was a large patch on one leg of his trousers.
 I He said “Wa’ kind o’ directions?”
“We’re trying to find Mother Rittah.”
The boy’s eyes flickered. “Wa’ for guy?”
“I’m a scholar. Do you know what a scholar
“Ya went to school?”
“Yes. Didn’t you?”
The boy spat to one side in contempt. “Nah.”
“I want advice from Mother Rittah-if you’ll take me to her.”
“Ya want your fortune? Ya come to Billibotton guy with your fancy clothes so ! can tell ya your fortune. All bad.”
“What’s your name young man?”
“What’s it to ya?”
“So we can speak in a more friendly fashion. And so you can take me to Mother Rittah’s place. Do you know where she lives?”
“Maybe yes maybe no. My name’s Raych. What’s in it for me if I take ya?”
“What would you like Raych?”
The boy’s eyes halted at Dors’s belt. Raych said “The lady got a couple o’ knives. Gimme one and I’ll take ya to Mother Rittah.”
“Those are grown people’s knives Raych. You’re too young.”
“Then I guess I’m too young to know where Mother Rittah lives.” And he looked up slyly through the shaggy halt that curtained his eyes.
Seldon grew uneasy. It was possible they might attract a crowd. Several men had stopped already but had then moved on when nothing of interest seemed to be taking place.
 If however the boy grew angry and lashed out at them in word or deed people would undoubtedly gather.
He smiled and said “Can you read Raych?”
Raych spat again. “Nab! Who wants to read?”
“Can you use a computer?”
“A talking computer? Sure. Anyone can.”
“I’ll tell you what then. You take me to the nearest computer store and I’ll buy you a little computer all your own and software that will teach you to read.
 A few weeks and you’ll be able to read.”
It seemed to Seldon that the boy’s eyes sparkled at the thought but-if so-they hardened at once. *’Nab Knife or nothin’.”
“That’s the point Raych. You learn to read and don’t tell anyone and you can surprise people. After a while you can bet them you can read.
 Bet them five credits. You can win a few extra credits that way and you can buy a knife of your own.”
The boy hesitated. “Nab! No one will bet me. No one got credits.”
“If you can read you can get a job in a knife store and you can save your wages and get a knife at a discount. How about that?”
“When ya gonna buy the talking computer?”
“Right now. I’ll give it to you when I see Mother Rittah.”
“You got credits?”
“I have a credit tile.”
“Let’s see ya buy the computer.”
The transaction was carried through but when the boy reached for it Seldon shook his head and put it inside his pouch. “You’ve got to get me to Mother Rittah first Raych.
 Are you sure you know where to find her?”
Raych allowed a look of contempt to cross his face. “Sure I do. I’ll take ya there only ya better hand over the computer when we get there or I’
ll get some guys I know after you and the lady so ya better watch out.”
“You don’t have to threaten us ” said Seldon. “We’ll take care of our end of the deal.”
Raych led them quickly along the walkway past curious stares.
Seldon was silent during the walk and so was Dors. Dors was far less lost in her own thoughts though for she clearly remained conscious of the surrounding people at all times.
 She kept meeting with a level glare the eyes of those passersby that turned toward them. On occasion when there were footsteps behind them she turned to look grimly back.
And then Raych stopped and said “In here. She ain’t homeless ya know.”
They followed him into an apartment complex and Seldon who had had the intention of following their route with a view to retracing his steps later was quickly lost.
He said “How do you know your way through these alleys Raych?”
The boy shrugged. “I been loafin’ through them since I was a kid ” he said. “Besides the apartments are numbered-where they ain’
t broken offend there’s arrows and things. You can’t get lost if you know the tricks.”
Raych knew the tricks apparently and they wandered deeper into the complex. Hanging over it all was an air of total decay: disregarded debris inhabitants slinking past in clear resentment of the outsiders’
 invasion. Unruly youngsters ran along the alleys in pursuit of some game or other. Some of them yelled “Hey get out o’ the way!
” when their levitating ball narrowly missed Dors.
And finally Raych stopped before a dark scarred door on which the number 2782 glowed feebly.
“This is it ” he said and held out his hand.
“First let’s see who’s inside ” said Seldon softly. He pushed the signal button and nothing happened.
“It don’t work ” said Raych. “Ya gotta bang. Loud. She don’t hear too good.”
Seldon pounded his fist on the door and was rewarded with the sound of movement inside. A shrill voice called out “Who wants Mother Rittah?”
Seldon shouted “Two scholars!”
He tossed the small computer with its small package of software attached to Raych who snatched it grinned and took off at a rapid run. Seldon then turned to face the opening door and Mother Rittah.
70.
Mother Rittah was well into her seventies perhaps but had the kind of face that at first sight seemed to belie that. Plump cheeks a little mouth a small round chin slightly doubled.
 She was very short-not quite 1.5 meters talland had a thick body.
But there were fine wrinkles about her eyes and when she smiled as she smiled at the sight of them others broke out over her face. And she moved with difficulty.
“Come in come in ” she said in a soft high-pitched voice and peered at them as though her eyesight was beginning to fail.
 “Outsiders . . . Outworlders even. Am I right? You don’t seem to have the Trantor smell about you.”
Seldon wished she hadn’t mentioned smell. The apartment overcrowded and littered with small possessions that seemed dim and dusty reeked with food odors that were on the edge of rancidity.
 The air was so thick and clinging that he was sure his cloches would smell strongly of it when they left.
He said “You are sight Mother Rittah. I am Hari Seldon of Helicon. My friend is Dors Venabili of Cinna.”
“So ” she said looking about for an unoccupied spot on the floor where she could invite them to sit but finding none suitable.
Dors said “We are willing to stand Mother.”
“What?” she looked up at Dors. “You must speak briskly my child. My hearing is not what it was when I was your age.”
“Why don’t you get a hearing device?” said Seldon raising his voice.
“It wouldn’t help Master Seldon. Something seems to be wrong with the nerve and I have no money for nerve rebuilding. -You have come to learn the future from old Mother Rittah?”
“Not quite ” said Seldon. “I have come to learn the past.”
“Excellent. It is such a strain to decide what people want to hear.”
“It must 6e quite an art ” said Dors smiling.
“It seems easy but one has to he properly convincing. I earn my fees.”
“If you have a credit outlet ” said Seldon. “We will pay any reasonable fees if you tell us about Earth-without cleverly designing what you tell us to suit what we want to hear. We wish to hear the truth.”
The old woman who had been shuffling about the room making adjustments here and there as though to make it all prettier and more suitable for important visitors stopped shots.
 “What do you want to know about Earth?”
“What is it to begin with?”
The old woman turned and seemed to gaze off into space. When she spoke her voice was low and steady.
“It is a world a very old planet. It is forgotten and lost.”
Dors said “It is not part of history. We know that much.”
“It comes before history child ” said Mother Rittah solemnly. “It existed in the dawn of the Galaxy and before the dawn. It was the only world with humanity.” She nodded firmly.
Seldon said “Was another name for Earth . . . Aurora?”
And now Mother Rittah’s face misted into a frown. “Where did you hear that?”
“In my wanderings. I have heard of an old forgotten world named Aurora on which humanity lived in primordial peace.”
“It’s a lie. ” She wiped her mouth as though to get the taste of what she had just heard out of it. “That name you mention must never be mentioned except as the place of Evil.
 It was the beginning of Evil. Earth was alone till Evil came along with its sister worlds. Evil nearly destroyed Earth but Earth rallied and destroyed Evil with the help of heroes.”
“Earth was before this Evil. Are you sure of that?”
“Long before. Earth was alone in the Galaxy for thousands of years millions of years.”
“Millions of years? Humanity existed on it for millions of years with no other people on any other world?”
“That’s true. That’s true. That’s true. “
“But how do you know all this? Is it all in a computer program? Or a printout? Do you have anything I can read?”
Mother Rittah shook her head. “I heard the old stories from my mother who heard it from hers and so on far back. I have no children so I tell the stories to others but it may come to an end. This is a time of disbelief.”
Dors said “Not really Mother. There are people who speculate about prehistoric times and who study some of the tales of lost worlds.”
Mother Rittah made a motion of her arm as though to wipe it away. “They look at it with cold eyes. Scholarly. They try to fit it in with their notions.
 I could tell you stories for a year of the great hero Ba-Lee but you would have no time to listen and I have lost the strength to tell.”
Seldon said “Have you ever heard of robots?”
The old woman shuddered and her voice was almost a scream. “Why do you ask such things? Those were artificial human beings evil in themselves and the work of the Evil worlds.
 They were destroyed and should never be mentioned.”
“There was one special robot wasn’t there that the Evil worlds hated?”
Mother Rittah tottered toward Seldon and peered into his eyes. He could feel her hot breath on his face. “Have you come to mock me?
 You know of these things and yet you ask? Why do you ask?”
“Because I wish to know.”
“There was an artificial human being who helped Earth. He was DaNee friend of Ba-Lee. He never died and lives somewhere waiting for his time to return.
 None knows when that time will be but someday he will come and restore the great old days and remove all cruelty injustice and misery.
 That is the promise.” At this she closed her eyes and smiled as if remembering . . .
Seldon waited a while in silence then sighed and said “Thank you Mother Rittah. You have been very helpful. What is your fee?”
“So pleasant to meet Outworlders ” the old woman replied. “Ten credits. May I offer you some refreshment?”
“No thank you ” said Seldon earnestly. “Please take twenty. You need only tell us how to get back to the Expressway from here.
 -And Mother Rittah if you can arrange to have some of your tales of Earth put into a computer disc I will pay you well.”
“I would need so much strength. How well?”
“It would depend on how long the story is and how well it is told. I might pay a thousand credits.”
Mother Rittah licked her lips. “A thousand credits? But how will I find you when the story is told?”
“I will give you the computer code number at which I can be reached.”
After Seldon gave Mother Rittah the code number he and Dors left thankful for the comparatively clean odor of the alley outside. They walked briskly in the direction indicated by the old woman.
Dors said “That wasn’t a very long interview Hari.”
“I know. The surroundings were terribly unpleasant and I felt I had learned enough. Amazing how these folktales tend to magnify.”
“What do you mean ‘magnify’?”
“Well the Mycogenians fill their Aurora with human beings who lived for centuries and the Dahlites fill their Earth with a humanity that lived for millions of years.
 And both talk of a robot that lives forever. Still it makes one think.”
“As far as millions of years go there’s room for-Where are we going?”
“Mother Rittah said we go in this direction till we reach a rest area then follow the sign for CENTRAL WALKWAY bearing left and keep on following the sign.
 Did we pass a rest area on the way in?.
“We may be leaving by a route different from the one we came in. I don’t remember a rest area but I wasn’t watching the route.
 I was keeping my eye on the people we passed and-’
Her voice died away. Up ahead the alley swelled outward on both sides.
Seldon remembered. They had passed that way. There had been a couple of ratty couch pads resting on the walkway floor on either side.
There was however no need for Dors to watch passersby going out as she had coming in. There were no passersby. But up ahead in the rest area they spotted a group of men rather large-sized for Dahlites mustaches bristling bare upper arms muscular and glistening under the yellowish indoor light of the walkway.
Clearly they were waiting for the Outworlders and almost automatically Seldon and Dors came to a halt. For a moment or two the tableau held.
 Then Seldon looked behind him hastily. Two or three additional men had stepped into view.
Seldon said between his teeth “We’re trapped. I should not have let you come Dors.”
“On the contrary. This is why I’m here but was it worth your seeing Mother Rittah?”
“If we get out of this it was.”
Seldon then said in a loud and firm voice “May we pass?”
One of the men ahead stepped forward. He was fully Seldon’s height of 1.73 meters but broader in the shoulders and much more muscular.
 A bit flabby at the waist though Seldon noted.
“I’m Marron ” he said with self-satisfied significance as though the name ought to have meaning “and I’m here to tell you we don’
t like Outworlders in our district. You want to come in all rightbut if you want to leave you’ll have to pay.”
“Very well. How much?”
“All you’ve got. You rich Outworlders have credit tiles right? Just hand them over.”
“No.”
“No point saying no. We’ll just take them.”
“You can’t take them without killing me or hurting me and they won’t work without my voiceprint. My normal voiceprint.”
“That’s not so Master-see I’m being polite-we can take them away from you without hurting you very much.”
“How many of you big strong men will it take? Nine? No.” Seldon counted rapidly. “Ten.”
“Just one. Me.”
“With no help?”
‘ Just me.”
“If the rest of you will clear away and give us room I would like to see you cry it Marron.”
“You don’t have a knife Master. You want one?”
“No use yours to make the fight even. I’ll fight without one.”
Marron looked about at the others and said “Hey this puny guy is a sport. He don’t even sound scared. That’s sort of nice.
 It would be a shame to hurt him. -I tell you what Master. I’ll take the girl. If you want me to stop hand over your credit tile and her tile and use your right voices to activate them.
 If you say no then after I’m through with the girl . . . and that’ll take some time”-he laughed“I’ll just have to hurt you.”
“No ” said Seldon. “Let the woman go. I’ve challenged you to a fight one to one you with a knife me without.
 If you want bigger odds I’ll fight two of you but let the woman go.”
“Stop Hari!” cried out Dors. “If he wants me let him come and get me. You stay right where you are Hari and don’t move.”
“You hear that?” said Marron grinning broadly. “‘You stay right where you are Hari and don’t move.’ I think the little lady wants me. You two keep him still.”
Each of Seldon’s arms were caught in an iron grip and he felt the sharp point of a knife in his back.
“Don’t move ” said a harsh whisper in his ear “and you can watch. The lady will probably like it. Marron’s pretty good at this.”
Dors called out again. “Don’t move Hari!” She corned to face Marron watchfully her half-closed hands poised near her belt.
He closed in on her purposefully and she waited till he had come within arm’s length when suddenly her own arms flashed and Marron found himself facing two large knives.
For a moment he leaned backward and then he laughed. “The little lady has two knives-knives like the big boys have. And I’
ve only got one. But that’s fair enough.” His knife was swiftly out. “I hate to have to cut you little lady because it will be more fun for both of us if I don’
t. Maybe I can just knock them out of your hands huh?”
Dors said “I don’t want to kill you. I’ll do all I can to avoid doing so. Just the same I call on all to witness that if I do kill you it is to protect my friend as I am honor-bound to do.”
Macron pretended to be terrified. “Oh please don’t kill me little lady.” Then he burst into laughter and was joined by the other Dahlites present.
Macron lunged with his knife quite wide of the mark. He tried it again then a third time but Dors never budged. She made no attempt to fend off any motion that was not truly aimed at her.
Macron’s expression darkened. He was trying to make her respond with panic but he was only making himself seem ineffectual. The next lunge was directly at her and Dors’
s left-hand blade moved flashingly and caught his with a force that pushed his arm aside. Her right-hand blade flashed inward and made a diagonal slit in his T-shirt.
 A thin bloody line smeared the dark-haired skin beneath.
Macron looked down at himself in shock as the onlookers gasped in surprise. Seldon felt the grip on him weaken slightly as the two who held him were distracted by a duel not going quite as they had expected. He tensed himself.
Now Macron lunged again and this time his left hand shot outward to enclose Dors’s right wrist. Again Dors’s left-hand blade caught his knife and held it motionless while her right hand twisted agilely and drew downward even as Macron’
s left hand closed upon it. It closed on nothing but the blade and when he opened his hand there was a bloody line down the palm.
Dors sprang back and Macron aware of the blood on his chest and hand roared out chokingly “Someone toss me another knife!”
There was hesitation and then one of the onlookers tossed his own knife underhanded. Macron reached for it but Dors was quicker. Her right-hand blade struck the thrown knife and sent it flying backward whirling as it went.
Seldon felt the grips on his arms weaken further. He lifted them suddenly pushing up and forward and was free. His two captors turned toward him with a sudden shout but he quickly kneed one in the groin and elbowed the other in the solar plexus and both went down.
He knelt to draw the knives of each and rose as double-armed as Dors. Unlike Dors Seldon did not know how to handle the blades but he knew the Dahlites would scarcely be aware of that
Dor said ‘ Just keep them off Hari. Don’t attack yet. -Macron my next stroke will not be a scratch.”
Macron totally enraged roared incoherently and charged blindly attempting by sheer kinetic energy to overwhelm his opponent. Dors dipping and sidestepping ducked under his right arm kicked her foot against his right ankle and down he crashed his knife flying.
She then knelt placed one blade against the back of his neck and the other against his throat and said “Yield!”
With another yell Macron struck out against her with one arm pushed her to one side then scrambled to his feet.
He had not yet stood up completely when she was upon him one knife slashing downward and hacking away a section of his mustache. This time he yowled like a large animal in agony clapping his hand to his face.
 When he drew it away it was dripping blood.
Dors shouted “It won’t grow again Macron. Some of the lip went with it. Attack once more and you’re dead meat.”
She waited but Macron had had enough. He stumbled away moaning leaving a trail of blood.
Dors turned toward the others. The two that Seldon had knocked down were still lying there unarmed and not anxious to get up. She bent down cut their belts with one of her knives and then slit their trousers.
“This way you’ll have to hold your pants up when you walk ” she said.
She stared at the seven men still on their feet who were watching her with awestruck fascination. “And which of you threw the knife?”
There was silence.
She said “It doesn’t matter to me. Come one at a time or all together but each time I slash someone dies.”
And with one accord the seven turned and scurried away.
Dors lifted her eyebrows and said to Seldom “This time at least Hummin can’t complain that I failed to protect you.”
Seldon said “I still can’t believe what I saw. I didn’t know you could do anything like thator talk like that either.”
Dors merely smiled. “You have your talents too. We make a good pair. Here retract your knife blades and put them into your pouch.
 I think the news will spread with enormous speed and we can get out of Billibotton without fear of being stopped.”
She was quite right.
Undercover
DAVAN- . . . In the unsettled times marking the final centuries of the First Galactic Empire the typical sources of unrest arose from the fact that political and military leaders jockeyed for “supreme”
 power (a supremacy that grew more worthless with each decade). Only rarely was there anything that could be called a popular movement prior to the advent of psychohistory.
 In this connection one intriguing example involves Davan of whom little is actually known but who may have met with Hari Seldon at one time when . . .
ENCYCLOPEDIA GALACTICA
72.
Both Hari Seldon and Dors Venabili had taken rather lingering baths making use of the somewhat primitive facilities available to them in the Tisalver household. They had changed their clothing and were in Seldon’
s room when Jirad Tisalver returned in the evening. His signal at the door was (or seemed) rather timid. The buzz did not last long.
Seldon opened the door and said pleasantly “Good evening Master Tisalver. And Mistress.”
She was standing right behind her husband forehead puckered into a puzzled frown.
Tisalver said tentatively as though he was unsure of the situation “Are you and Mistress Venabili both well?” He nodded his head as though trying to elicit an affirmative by body language.
“Quite well. In and out of Billibotton without trouble and we’re all washed and changed. There’s no smell left.” Seldon lifted his chin as he said it smiling tossing the sentence over Tisalver s shoulder to his wife.
She sniffed loudly as though testing the matter.
Still tentatively Tisalver said “I understand there was a knife fight.”
Seldon raised his eyebrows. “Is that the story?”
“You and the Mistress against a hundred thugs we were cold and you killed them all. Is that so?” There was the reluctant sound of deep respect in his voice.
“Absolutely not ” Dors put in with sudden annoyance. “That’s ridiculous. What do you think we are? Mass murderers? And do you think a hundred thugs would remain in place waiting the considerable time it would take me-us-to kill them all? I mean think about it.”
“That’s what they’re saying ” said Casilia Tisalver with shrill firmness. “We can’t have that sort of thing in this house.”
“In the first place ” said Seldon “it wasn’t in this house. In the second it wasn’t a hundred men it was ten.
 In the third no one was killed. There was some altercation back and forth after which they left and made way for us.”
“They just made way. Do you expect me to believe that Outworlders?” demanded Mistress Tisalver belligerently.
Seldon sighed. At the slightest stress human beings seemed to divide themselves into antagonistic groups. He said “Well I grant you one of them was cut a little. Not seriously.”
“And you weren’t hurt at all?” said Tisalver. The admiration in his voice was more marked.
“Not a scratch ” said Seldon. “Mistress Venabili handles two knives excellently well.”
“I dare say ” said Mistress Tisalver her eyes dropping to Dors’s belt “and that’s not what I want to have going on here.”
Dors said sternly “As long as no one attacks us here that’s what you won’t have here.”
“But on account of you ” said Mistress Tisalver “we have trash from the street standing at the doorway.”
“My love ” said Tisalver soothingly “let us not anger“
“Why?” spat his wife with contempt. “Are you afraid of her knives? I would like to see her use them here.”
“I have no intention of using them here ” said Dors with a sniff as loud as any that Mistress Tisalver had produced. “What is this trash from the street you’re talking about?”
Tisalver said “What my wife means is that an urchin from Billibotton-at least judging by his appearance-wishes to see you and we are not accustomed to that sort of thing in this neighborhood.
 It undermines our standing.” He sounded apologetic.
Seldon said “Well Master Tisalver we’ll go outside find out what it’s all about and send him on his business as quickly“
“No. Wait ” said Dors annoyed. “These are our rooms. We pay for them. We decide who visits us and who does not.
 If there is a young man outside from Billibotton he is nonetheless a Dahlite. More important he’s a Trantorian. Still more important he’
s a citizen of the Empire and a human being. Most important by asking to see us he becomes our guest. Therefore we invite him in to see us.”
Mistress Tisalver didn’t move. Tisalver himself seemed uncertain.
Dors said “Since you say I killed a hundred bullies in Billibotton you surely do not think I am afraid of a boy or for that matter of you two.
” Her right hand dropped casually to her belt.
Tisalver said with sudden energy “Mistress Venabili we do not intend to offend you. Of course these rooms are yours and you can entertain whomever you wish here.
” He stepped back pulling his indignant wife with him undergoing a burst of resolution for which he might conceivably have to pay afterward.
Dors looked after them sternly.
Seldon smiled dryly. “How unlike you Dors. I thought I was the one who quixotically got into trouble and that you were the calm and practical one whose only aim was to prevent trouble.”
Dors shook her head. “I can’t bear to hear a human being spoken of with contempt just because of his group identification-even by other human beings.
 It’s these respectable people here who create those hooligans out there.”
“And other respectable people ” said Seldon “who create these respectable people. These mutual animosities are as much a part of humanity“
“Then you’ll have to deal with it in your psychohistory won’t you?”
“Most certainly-if there is ever a psychohistory with which to deal with anything at all. -Ah here comes the urchin under discussion. And it’
s Raych which somehow doesn’t surprise me.”
73.
Raych entered looking about clearly intimidated. The forefinger of his right hand reached for his upper lip as though wondering when he would begin to feel the first downy hairs there.
He turned to the clearly outraged Mistress Tisalver and bowed clumsily. “Thank ya Missus. Ya got a lovely place.”
Then as the door slammed behind him he turned to Seldon and Dors with an air of easy connoisseurship. “Nice place guys.”
“I’m glad you like it ” said Seldon solemnly. “How did you know we were here?”
“Followed ya. How’d ya think? Hey lady”-he turned to Dors ’you don’t fight like no dame.”
“Have you watched many dames fight?” asked Dors amused.
Raych rubbed his nose “No never seen none whatever. They don’t carry knives except little ones to scare kids with. Never scared me.”
“I’m sure they didn’t. What do you do to make dames draw their knives?”
“Nothin’. You just kid around a little. You holler ‘Hey lady lemme-’ “
He thought about it for a moment and said “Nothin’.”
Dors said “Well don’t try that on me.”
“Ya kiddin’? After what ya did to Marron? Hey lady where’d you learn to fight that way?”
“On my own world.”
“Could ya teach me?”
“Is that what you came here to see me about?”
“Akchaly no. I came to bring ya a kind of message.”
“From someone who wants to fight me?”
“No one wants to fight ya lady. Listen lady ya got a reputation now. Everybody knows ya. You just walk down anywhere in old Billibotton and all the guys will step aside and let ya pass and grin and make sure they don’
t look cross-eyed at ya. Oh lady ya got it made. That’s why he wants to see ya.”
Seldon said “Raych just exactly who wants to see us?”
“Guy called Davan.”
“And who is he?”
“Just a guy. He lives in Billibotton and don’t carry no knife.”
“And he stays alive Raych?”
“He reads a lot and he helps the guys there when they get in trouble with the gov’ment. They kinda leave him alone. He don’t need no knife.”
“Why didn’t he come himself then?” said Dors. “Why did he send you?”
“He don’t like this place. He says it makes him sick. He says all the people here they lick the gov’ment’ s”
 He paused looked dubiously at the two Outworlders and said “Anyway he won’t come here. He said they’d let me in cause I was only a kid.
” He grinned. “They almost didn’t did they? I mean that lady there who looked like she was smellin’ somethin’?”
He stopped suddenly abashed and looked down at himself. “Ya don’t get much chance to wash where I come from.”
“It’s all right ” said Dors smiling. “Where are we supposed to meet then if he won’t come here? After all-if you don’
t mind we don’t feel like going to Billibotton.”
“I told ya ” said Raych indignantly. “Ya get free run of Billibotton I swear. Besides where he lives no one will bother ya.”
“Where is it?” asked Seldon.
“I can take ya there. It ain’t far.”
“And why does he want to see us?” asked Dors.
“Dunno. But he says like this” Raych half-closed his eyes in an effort to remember. “‘Tell them I wanna see the man who talked to a Dahlite heatsinker like he was a human being and the woman who beat Marron with knives and didn’
t kill him when she mighta done so.’ I think I got it right.”
Seldon smiled. “I think you did. Is he ready for us now?”
“He’s waiting.”
“Then we’ll come with you.” He looked at Dors with a trace of doubt in his eyes.
She said “All right. I’m willing. Perhaps it won’t be a trap of some sort. Hope springs eternal“
74.
There was a pleasant glow to the evening light when they emerged a faint violet touch and a pinkish edge to the simulated sunset clouds that were scudding along.
 Dahl might have complaints of their treatment by the Imperial rulers of Trantor but surely there was nothing wrong with the weather the computers spun out for them.
Dors said in a low voice “We seem to be celebrities. No mistake about that.”
Seldon brought his eyes down from the supposed sky and was immediately aware of a fair-sized crowd around the apartment house in which the Tisalvers lived.
Everyone in the crowd stared at them intently. When it was clear that the two Outworlders had become aware of the attention a low murmur ran through the crowd which seemed to be on the point of breaking out into applause.
Dors said “Now I can see where Mistress Tisalver would find this annoying. I should have been a little more sympathetic.”
The crowd was for the most part poorly dressed and it was not hard to guess that many of the people were from Billibotton.
On impulse Seldon smiled and raised one hand in a mild greeting that was met with applause. One voice lost in the safe anonymity of the crowd called out “Can the lady show us some knife tricks?”
When Dors called back “No I only draw in anger ” there was instant laughter.
One man stepped forward. He was clearly not from Billibotton and bore no obvious mark of being a Dahlite. He had only a small mustache for one thing and it was brown not black.
 He said “Marlo Tanto of the ‘Trantorian HV News.’ Can we have you in focus for a bit for our nightly holocast?”
“No ” said Dors shortly. “No interviews.”
The newsman did not budge. “I understand you were in a fight with a great many men in Billibottonand won.” He smiled. “That’s news that is.”
“No ” said Dors. “We met some men in Billibotton talked to them and then moved on. That’s all there is to it and that’s all you’re going to get.”
“What’s your name? You don’t sound like a Trantorian.”
“I have no name.”
“And your friend’s name?”
“He has no name.”
The newsman looked annoyed “Look lady. You’re news and I’m just trying to do my job.”
Raych pulled at Dors’s sleeve. She leaned down and listened to his earnest whisper.
She nodded and straightened up again. “I don’t think you’re a newsman Mr. Tanto. What I think you are is an Imperial agent trying to make trouble for Dahl.
 There was no fight and you’re trying to manufacture news concerning one as a way of justifying an Imperial expedition into Billibotton. I wouldn’
t stay here if I were you. I don’t think you’re very popular with these people.”
The crowd had begun to mutter at Dors’s first words. They grew louder now and began to drift slowly and in a menacing way in the direction of Tanto.
 He looked nervously around and began to move away.
Dors raised her voice. “Let him go. Don’t anyone touch him. Don’t give him any excuse to report violence.”
And they parted before him.
Raych said “Aw lady you shoulda let them rough him up.”
“Bloodthirsty boy ” said Dors “take us to this friend of yours.”
75.
They met the man who called himself Davan in a room behind a dilapidated diner. Far behind.
Raych led the way once more showing himself as much at home in the burrows of Billibotton as a mole would be in tunnels underground in Helicon.
It was Dors Venabili whose caution first manifested itself. She stopped and said “Come back Raych. Exactly where are we going?”
“To Davan ” said Raych looking exasperated. “I told ya.”
“But this is a deserted area. There’s no one living here.” Dors looked about with obvious distaste. The surroundings were lifeless and what light panels were there were did not glower did so only dimly.
“It’s the way Davan likes it ” said Raych. “He’s always changing around staying here staying there. Ya know . . . changing around.”
“Why?” demanded Dors.
“It’s safer lady.”
“From whom?”
“From the gov’ment”
“Why would the government want Davan?”
“I dunno lady. Tell ya what. I’ll tell ya where he is and tell ya how to go and ya go on alone-if ya don’t want me to take ya.”
Seldon said “No Raych I’m pretty sure we’ll get lost without you. In fact you had better wait till we’re through so you can lead us back.”
Raych said at once “What’s in it f’me? Ya expect me to hang around when I get hungry?”
“You hang around and get hungry Raych and I’ll buy you a big dinner. Anything you like.”
“Ya say that now. Mister. How do I know?”
Dors’s hand flashed and it was holding a knife blade exposed “You’re not calling us liars are you Raych?”
Raych’s eyes opened wide. He did not seem frightened by the threat. He said “Hey I didn’t see that. Do it again.”
“I’ll do it afterward-if you’re still here. Otherwise”-Dors glared at him “we’ll track you down.”
“Aw lady come on ” said Raych. “Ya ain’t gonna track me down. Ya ain’t that kind. But I’ll be here.
” He struck a pose. “Ya got my word.”
And he led them onward in silence though the sound of their shoes was hollow in the empty corridors.
Davan looked up when they entered a wild look that softened when he saw Raych. He gestured quickly toward the two others questioningly.
Raych said “These are the guys.” And grinning he left.
Seldon said “I am Hari Seldon. The young lady is Dors Venabili.”
He regarded Davan curiously. Davan was swarthy and had the thick black mustache of the Dahlite male but in addition he had a stubble of beard.
 He was the first Dahlite whom Seldon had seen who had not been meticulously shaven. Even the bullies of Billibotton had been smooth of cheek and chin.
Seldon said “What is your name sir?”
“Davan. Raych must have told you.”
“Your second name.”
“I am only Davan. Were you followed here Master Seldon?”
“No I’m sure we weren’t. If we had then by sound or sight I expect Raych would have known. And if he had not Mistress Venabili would have.”
Dors smiled slightly. “You have faith in me Hari.”
“More all the time ” he said thoughtfully.
Davan stirred uneasily. “Yet you’ve already been found.”
“Found?”
“Yes I have heard of this supposed newsman.”
“Already?” Seldon looked faintly surprised. “But I suspect he really was a newsman . . . and harmless. We tatted him an Imperial agent at Raych’
s suggestion which was a good idea. The surrounding crowd grew threatening and we got rid of him.”
“No ” said Davan “he was what you called him. My people know the man and he does work for the Empire. but then you do not do as I do.
 You do not use a false name and change your place of abode. You go under your own names making no effort to remain undercover. You are Hari Seldon the mathematician.”
“Yes I am ” said Seldon. “Why should I invent a false name?”
“The Empire wants you does it not?”
Seldon shrugged. “I stay in places where the Empire cannot reach out to take me.”
“Not openly but the Empire doesn’t have to work openly. I would urge you to disappear . . . really disappear.”
“Like you . . . as you say ” said Seldom looking about with an edge of distaste. The room was as dead as the corridors he had walked through.
 It was musty through and through and it was overwhelmingly depressing.
“Yes ” said Davan. “You could be useful to us.”
“In what way?”
“You talked to a young man named Yugo Amaryl.”
“Yes I did.”
“Amaryl tells me that you can predict the future.”
Seldon sighed heavily. He was tired of standing in this empty room. Davan was sitting on a cushion and there were other cushions available but they did not look clean.
 Nor did he wish to lean against the mildew-streaked wall.
He said “Either you misunderstood Amaryl or Amaryl misunderstood me. What I have done is to prove that it is possible to choose staffing conditions from which historical forecasting does not descend into chaotic conditions but can become predictable within limits.
 However what those starting conditions might be I do not know nor am I sure that those conditions can be found by any one personor by any number of people-in a finite length of time. Do you understand me?”
‘No.’
Seldon sighed again. “Then let me try once more. It is possible to predict the future but it may be impossible to find out how to take advantage of that possibility. Do you understand?”
Davan looked at Seldon darkly then at Dors. “Then you cant predict the future.”
“Now you have the point Master Davan.”
‘Just call me Davan. But you may be able to learn to predict the future someday.”
“That is conceivable.”
“Then that’s why the Empire wants you.”
“No ” Seldon raised his finger didactically. “It’s my idea that that is why the Empire is not making an overwhelming effort to get me.
 They might like to have me if I can be picked up without trouble but they know that right now I know nothing and that it is therefore not worth upsetting the delicate peace of Trantor by interfering with the local rights of this sector or that.
 That’s the reason I can move about under my own name with reasonable security.”
For a moment Davan buried his head in his hands and muttered “This is madness.” Then he looked up wearily and said to Dors “Are you Master Seldon’s wife?”
Dors said calmly “I am his friend and protector.”
“How well do you know him?”
“We have been together for some months.”
“No more?”
“No more.”
“Would it be your opinion he is speaking the truth?”
“I know he is but what reason would you have to crust me if you do not trust him? If Hari is for some reason lying to you might I not be lying to you equally in order to support him?”
Davan looked from one to the other helplessly. Then he said “Would you in any case help us?”
“Who are ‘us’ and in what way do you need help?”
Davan said “You see the situation here in Dahl. We are oppressed. You must know that and from your treatment of Yugo Amaryl I cannot believe you lack sympathy for us.”
“We are fully sympathetic.”
“And you must know the source of the oppression.”
“You are going to cell me that it’s the Imperial government I suppose and I dare say it plays its part. On the other hand I notice that there is a middle class in Dahl that despises the heatsinkers and a criminal class that terrorizes the rest of the sector.”
Davan’s lips tightened but he remained unmoved. “Quite true. Quite true. But the Empire encourages it as a matter of principle. Dahl has the potential for making serious trouble.
 If the heatsinkers should go on strike Trantor would experience a severe energy shortage almost at once . . . with all that that implies. However
Dahl’s own upper classes will spend money to hire the hoodlums of Billibotton—and of other places-to fight the heatsinkers and break the strike.
 It has happened before. The Empire allows some Dahlites to prosper-comparatively-in order to convert them into Imperialist lackeys while it refuses to enforce the arms-control laws effectively enough to weaken the criminal element
“The Imperial government does this everywhereand not in Dahl alone. They can’t exert force to impose their will as in the old days when they ruled with brutal directness.
 Nowadays Trantor has grown so complex and so easily disturbed that the Imperial forces must keep their hands off“
“A form of degeneration ” said Seldon remembering Hummin’s complaints.
“What?” said Davan.
“Nothing ” said Seldon. “Go on.”
“The Imperial forces must keep their hands off but they find that they can do much even so. Each sector is encouraged to be suspicious of its neighbours.
 Within each sector economic and social classes are encouraged to wage a kind of war with each other. The result is that all over Trantor it is impossible for the people to take united action.
 Everywhere the people would rather fight each other than make a common stand against the central tyranny and the Empire rules without having to exert force.”
“And what ” said Dors “do you think can be done about it?”
“I’ve been trying for years to build a feeling of solidarity among the peoples of Trantor.”
“I can only suppose ” said Seldon dryly “that you are finding this an impossibly difficult and largely thankless task.”
“You suppose correctly ” said Davan “but the party is growing stronger. Many of our knifers are coming to the realization that knives are best when they are not used on each other.
 Those who attacked you in the corridors of Billibotton are examples of the unconverted. However those who support you now who are ready to defend you against the agent you thought was a newsman are my people.
 I live here among them. It is not an attractive way of life but I am safe here. We have adherents in neighboring sectors and we spread daily.”
“But where do we come in?” asked Dors.
“For one thing ” said Davan “both of you are Outworlders scholars. We need people like you among our leaders. Our greatest strength is drawn from the poor and the uneducated because they suffer the most but they can lead the least.
 A person like one of you two is worth a hundred of them.”
“That’s an odd estimate from someone who wishes to rescue the oppressed ” said Seldon.
“I don’t mean as people ” said Davan hastily. “I mean as far as leadership is concerned. The party must have among its leaders men and women of intellectual power.”
“People like us you mean are needed to give your party a veneer of respectability.”
Davan said “You can always put something noble in a sneering fashion if you try. But you Master Seldon are more than respectable more than intellectual.
 Even if you won’t admit to being able to penetrate the mists of the future—“
“Please Davan ” said Seldon “don’t be poetic and don’t use the conditional. It’s not a matter of admitting. I can’
t foresee the future. Those are not mists that block the view but chrome steel barriers.”
“Let me finish. Even if you can’t actually predict with-what do you call it?-psychohistorical accuracy you’ve studied history and you may have a certain intuitive feeling for consequences. Now isn’t that so?”
Seldon shook his head. “I may have a certain intuitive understanding for mathematical likelihood but how far I can translate that into anything of historical significance is quite uncertain.
 Actually I have not studied history. I wish I had. I feel the loss keenly.”
Dors said evenly “I am the historian Davan and I can say a few things if you wish.”
“Please do ” said Davan making it half a courtesy half a challenge.
“For one thing there have been many revolutions in Galactic history that have overthrown tyrannies sometimes on individual planets sometimes in groups of them occasionally in the Empire itself or in the pre-Imperial regional governments.
 Often this has only meant a change in tyranny. In other words one ruling class is replaced by another sometimes by one that is more efficient and therefore still more capable of maintaining itself-while the poor and downtrodden remain poor and downtrodden or become even worse off.”
Davan listening intently said “I’m aware of that. We all are. Perhaps we can learn from the past and know better what to avoid.
 Besides the tyranny that now exists is actual. That which may exist in the future is merely potential. If we are always to draw back from change with the thought that the change may be for the worse then there is no hope at all of ever escaping injustice.”
Dors said “A second point you must remember is that even if you have right on your side even if justice thunders condemnation it is usually the tyranny in existence that has the balance of force on its side.
 There is nothing your knife handlers can do in the way of rioting and demonstrating that will have any permanent effect as long as in the extremity there is an army equipped with kinetic chemical and neurological weapons that is willing to use them against your people.
 You can get all the downtrodden and even all the respectables on your side but you must somehow win over the security forces and the Imperial army or at least seriously weaken their loyalty to the rulers.”
Davan said “Trantor is a multigovernmental world. Each sector has its own rulers and some of them are themselves anti-Imperial. If we can have a strong sector on our side that would change the situation would it not?
 We would then not be merely ragamuffins fighting with knives and stones.”
“Does that mean you do have a strong sector on your side or merely that it is your ambition to have one?”
Davan was silent.
Dors said “I shall assume that you are thinking of the Mayor of Wye. If the Mayor is in the mood to make use of popular discontent as a way of improving the chance of toppling the Emperor doesn’
t it strike you that the end the Mayor would have in view would be that of succeeding to the Imperial throne? Why should the Mayor risk his present not-inconsiderable position for anything less?
 Merely for the blessings of justice and the decent treatment of people concerning whom he can have little interest?”
“You mean ” said Davan “that any powerful leader who is willing to help us may then betray us.”
“It is a situation that is all too common in Galactic history.”
“If we are ready for that might we not betray him?”
“You mean make use of him and then at some crucial moment subvert the leader of his forcesor a leader at any raceand have him assassinated?”
“Not perhaps exactly like that but some way of getting rid of him might exist if that should prove necessary.”
“Then we have a revolutionary movement in which the principal players must be ready to betray each other with each simply waiting for the opportunity.
 It sounds like a recipe for chaos.”
“You will not help us then?” said Davan.
Seldon who had been listening to the exchange between Davan and Dors with a puzzled frown on his face said “We can’t put it that simply.
 We would like to help you. We are on your side. It seems to me that no sane man wants to uphold an Imperial system that maintains itself by fostering mutual hatred and suspicions.
 Even when it seems to work it can only be described as metastable; that is as too apt to fall into instability in one direction or another.
 But the question is: How can we help? If I had psychohistory if I could tell what is most likely to happen or if I could tell what action of a number of alternative possibilities is most likely to bring on an apparently happy consequence then I would put my abilities at your disposal.
 but I don’t have is I can help you best by trying to develop psychohistory.”
“And how long will that take?”
Seldon shrugged. “I cannot say.”
“How can you ask us to wait indefinitely?”
“What alternative do I have since I am useless to you as I am? But I will say this: I have until very recently been quite convinced that the development of psychohistory was absolutely impossible.
 Now I am not so certain of that.”
“You mean you have a solution in mind?”
“No merely an intuitive feeling that a solution might be possible. I have not been able to pin down what has occurred to make me have that feeling.
 It may be an illusion but I am trying. Let me continue to try. -Perhaps the will meet again.”
“Or perhaps ” said Davan “if you return to where you are now staying you will eventually find yourself in an Imperial trap. You may think that the Empire will leave you alone white you struggle with psychohistory but I am certain the Emperor and his toady Demerzel are in no mood to wait forever any more than I am.”
“It will do them no good to hasten ” said Seldon calmly “since I am not on their side as I am on yours. -Come Dors.”
They turned and left Davan sitting alone in his squalid room and found Raych waiting for them outside.
76.
Raych was eating licking his fingers and crumpling the bag in which the food-whatever it was-had been. A strong smell of onions pervaded the air-different somehow yeast-based perhaps.
Dors recreating a little from the odor said “Where did you get the food from Raych?”
“Davan’s guys. They brought it to me. Davan’s okay.”
“Then we don’t have to buy you dinner do we?” said Seldon conscious of his own empty stomach.
“Ya owe me somethin’” said Raych looking greedily in Dors’s direction. “How about the lady’s knife? One of ‘em.”
“No knife ” said Dors. “You get us back safely and I’ll give you five credits.”
“Can’t get no knife for five credits ” grumbled Raych.
“You’re not getting anything but five credits ” said Dors.
“You’re a lousy dame lady ” said Raych.
“I’m a lousy dame with a quick knife Raych so get moving.”
“All right. Don’t get all perspired.” Raych waved his hand. “This way.”
It was back through the empty corridors but this time Dors looking this way and that stopped. “Hold on Raych. We’re being followed.”
Raych looked exasperated. “Ya ain’t supposed to hear ‘em.”
Seldon said bending his head to one side “I don’t hear anything.”
“I do ” said Dors. “Now Raych I don’t want any fooling around. You tell me right now what’s going on or I’
ll rap your head so that you won’t see straight for a week. I mean it.”
Raych held up one arm defensively. “You try it you lousy dame. You try it. -It’s Davan’s guys. They’re just taking care of us in case any knifers come along.”
“Davan’s guys?”
“Yeah. They’re goin’ along the service corridors.”
Dors’s right hand shot out and seized Raych by the scruff of his upper garment. She lifted and he dangled shouting “Hey lady. Hey!”
Seldon said “Dors! Don’t be hard on him.”
“I’ll be harder still if I think he’s lying. You’re my charge Hari not he.”
“I’m not lyin’ ” said Raych struggling. “I’m not.”
“I’m sure he isn’t ” said Seldon.
“Well we’ll see. Raych tell them to come out where we can see them.” She let him drop and dusted her hands.
“You’re some kind of nut lady ” said Raych aggrievedly. Then he raised his voice. “Yay Davan! Come out here some of ya guys!”
There was a wait and then from an unlit opening along the corridor two dark-mustached men came out one with a scar running the length of his cheek.
 Each held the sheath of a knife in his hand blade withdrawn.
“How many more of you are there?” asked Dors harshly.
“A few ” said one of the newcomers. “Orders. We’re guarding you. Davan wants you safe.”
“Thank you. Try to be even quieter. Raych keep on moving.”
Raych said sulkily “Ya toughed me up when I was telling the truth.”
“You’re right ” said Dors. “At least I think you’re right . . . and I apologize.”
“I’m not sure I should accept ” said Raych trying to stand tall. “But awright just this once.” He moved on.
When they reached the walkway the unseen corps of guards vanished. At least even Dors’s keen ears could hear them no more. By now though they were moving into the respectable part of the sector.
Dors said thoughtfully “I don’t think we have clothes that would fit you Raych.”
Raych said “Why do ya want clothes to fit me Missus?” (Respectability seemed to invade Raych once they were out of the corridors.) “I got clothes.”
“I thought you’d like to come into our place and take a bath.”
Raych said “What for? I’ll wash one o’ these days. And I’ll put on my other shirt.” He looked up at Dors shrewdly.
 “You’re sorry ya roughed me up. Right? Ya tryin’ to make up?”
Dors smiled. “Yes. Sort of.”
Raych waved a hand in lordly fashion. “That’s all right. Ya didn’t hurt. Listen. You’re strong for a lady. Ya lifted me up like I was nothin’.”
“I was annoyed Raych. I have to be concerned about Master Seldon.”
“Ya sort of his bodyguard?” Raych looked at Seldon inquiringly. “Ya got a lady for a bodyguard?”
“I can’t help it ” said Seldom smiling wryly. “She insists. And she certainly knows her job.”
Dors said “Think again Raych. Are you sure you won’t have a bath? A nice warm bath.”
Raych said “I got no chance. Ya think that lady is gonna let me in the house again?”
Dors looked up and saw Casilia Tisalver outside the front door of the apartment complex staring first at the Outworld woman and then at the slum-bred boy.
 It would have been impossible to tell in which case her expression was angrier.
Raych said “Well so long Mister and Missus. I don’t know if she’ll let either of ya in the house.” He placed his hands in his pocket and swaggered off in a fine affectation of carefree indifference.
Seldon said “Good evening Mistress Tisalver. It’s rather late isn’t it?”
“It’s very late ” she replied. “There was a near riot today outside this very complex because of that newsman you pushed the street vermin at.”
“We didn’t push anyone on anyone ” said Dors.
“I was there ” said Mistress Tisalver intransigently. “I saw it.”
She stepped aside to let them enter but delayed long enough to make her reluctance quite plain.
“She acts as though that was the last straw ” said Dors as she and Seldon made their way up to their rooms.
“So? What can she do about it?” asked Seldon.
“I wonder ” said Dors.
Officers
RAYCH- . . . According to Hari Seldon the original meeting with Raych was entirely accidental. He was simply a gutter urchin from whom Seldon had asked directions.
 But his life from that moment on continued to be intertwined with that of the great mathematician until .
ENCYCLOPEDIA GALACTICA
77.
The next morning dressed from the waist down having washed and shaved Seldon knocked on the door that led to Dors’s adjoining room and said in a moderate voice “Open the door Dors.”
She did. The short reddish-gold curls of her hair were still wet and she too was dressed only from the waist down.
Seldon stepped back in embarrassed alarm. Dors looked down at the swell of her breasts indifferently and wrapped a towel around her head. “What is it?” she asked.
Seldon said looking off to his right “I was going to ask you about Wye.”
Dors said very naturally “About why in connection with what? And for goodness sake don’t make me talk to your ear. Surely you’re not a virgin.”
Seldon said in a hurt tone “I was merely trying to be polite. If you don’t mind I certainly don’t. And it’
s not why about what. I’m asking about the Wye Sector.”
“Why do you want to know? Or if you prefer: Why Wye?”
“Look Dors I’m serious. Every once in a while the Wye Sector is mentioned-the Mayor of Wye actually. Hummin mentioned him you did Davan did.
 I don’t know anything about either the sector or the Mayor.”
“I’m not a native Trantorian either Hari. I know very little but you’re welcome to what I do know. Wye is near the south pole quite large very populous“
“Very populous at the south pole?”
“We’re not on Helicon Hari. Or on Cinna either. This is Trantor. Everything is underground and underground at the poles or underground at the equator is pretty much the same.
 Of course I imagine they keep their day-night arrangements rather extreme — long days in their summer long nights in their winter-almost as it would be on the surface.
 The extremes are just affectation; they’re proud of being polar.”
“But Upperside they must be cold indeed.”
“Oh yes. The Wye Upperside is snow and ice but it doesn’t lie as thickly there as you might think. If it did it might crush the dome but it doesn’
t and that is the basic reason for Wye’s power.”
She turned to her mirror removed the towel from her head and threw the dry-net over her hair which in a matter of five seconds gave it a pleasant sheen.
 She said “You have no idea how glad I am not to be wearing a skincap ” as she put on the upper portion of her clothing.
“What has the ice layer to do with Wye’s power?”
“Think about it. Forty billion people use a great deal of power and every calorie of it eventually degenerates into heat and has to be gotten rid of.
 It’s piped to the poles particularly to the south pole which is the more developed of the two and is discharged into space. It metes most of the ice in the process and I’
m sure that accounts for Trantor’s clouds and rains no matter how much the meteorology boggins insist that things are more complicated than that.”
“Does Wye make use of the power before discharging it?”
“They may for all I know. I haven’t the slightest idea by the way as to the technology involved in discharging the heat but I’
m talking about political power. If Dahl were to stop producing usable energy that would certainly. inconvenience Trantor but there are other sectors that produce energy and can up their production and of course there is stored energy in one form or another.
 Eventually Dahl would have to be dealt with but there would be time. Wye on the other hand-’
“Yes?”
“Well Wye gets rid of at least 90 percent of all the heat developed on Trantor and there is no substitute. If Wye were to shut down its heat emission the temperature would start going up all over Trantor.”
“In Wye too.”
“Ate but since Wye is at the south pole it can arrange an influx of cold air. It wouldn’t do much good but Wye would last longer than the rest of Trantor.
 The point is then that Wye is a very touchy problem for the Emperor and the Mayor of Wye isor at least can be-extremely powerful.”
“And what kind of a person is the present Mayor of Wye?”
“That I don’t know. What I’ve occasionally heard would make it seem that he is very old and pretty much a recluse but hard as a hypership hull and still cleverly maneuvering for power.”
“Why I wonder? If he’s that old he couldn’t hold the power for long.”
“Who knows Hari? A lifelong obsession I suppose. Or else it’s the game . . . the maneuvering for power without any real longing for the power itself.
 Probably if he had the power and took over Demerzel’s place or even the Imperial throne itself he would feel disappointed because the game would be over.
 Of nurse he might if he was still alive begin the subsequent game of keeping power which might be just as difficult and just as satisfying.”
Seldon shook his head. “It strikes me that no one could possibly want to be Emperor.”
“No sane person would I free but the ‘Imperial wish ‘ as it is frequently called is like a disease that when caught drives out sanity.
 And the closer you get to high office the more likely you are to catch the disease. With each ensuing promotion“
“The disease grows still more acute. Yes I can see that. But it also seems to me that Trantor is so huge a world so interlocking in its needs and so conflicting in its ambitions that it makes up the major part of the inability of the Emperor to rule.
 Why doesn’t he just leave Trantor and establish himself on some simpler world?”
Dors laughed. “You wouldn’t ask that if you knew your history. Trantor is the Empire through thousands of years of custom. An Emperor who is not at the Imperial Palace is not the Emperor.
 He is a place even more than a person.”
Seldon sank into silence his face rigid and after a while Dors asked What’s the matter Hari?”
“I’m thinking ” he said in a muffled voice. “Ever since you told me that hand-on-thigh story I’ve had fugitive thoughts that-Now your remark about the Emperor being a place rather than a person seems to have struck a chord.”
“What kind of chord?”
Seldon shook his head. “I’m still thinking. I may be all wrong.” His glance at Dors sharpened his eyes coming into focus.
 “In any case we ought to go down and have breakfast. We’re late and I don’t think Mistress Tisalver is in a good enough humor to have it brought in for us.”
“You optimist ” said Dors. “My own feeling is that she’s not in a good enough humor to want us to stay-breakfast or not. She wants us out of here.”
“That may be but we’re paying her.”
“Yes but I suspect she hates us enough by now to scorn our credits.”
“Perhaps her husband will feel a bit more affectionate concerning the rent.”
“If he has a single word to say Hari the only person who would be more surprised than me to hear it would be Mistress Tisalver. -Very well I’m ready.”
And they moved down the stairs to the Tisalver portion of the apartment to find the lady in question waiting for them with less than breakfastand with considerably more too.
78.
Casilia Tisalver stood ramrod straight with a tight smile on her round face and her dark eyes glinting. Her husband was leaning moodily against the wall.
 In the center of the room were two men who were standing stiffly upright as though they had noticed the cushions on the floor but scorned them.
Both had the dark crisp hair and the chick black mustache to be expected of Dahlites. Both were thin and both were dressed in dark clothes so nearly alike that they were surely uniforms.
 There was thin white piping up and over the shoulders and down the sides of the tubular trouser legs. Each had on the right side of his chest a rather dim Spaceship-and-Sun the symbol of the Galactic Empire on every inhabited world of the Galaxy with in this case a dark “D” in the center of the sun.
Seldon realized immediately that these were two members of the Dahlite security forces.
“What’s all this?” said Seldon sternly.
One of the men stepped forward. “I am Sector Officer Lanel Russ. This is my partner Gebore Astinwald.”
Both presented glittering identification holo-tabs. Seldon didn’t bother looking at them. “What it is you want?”
Russ said calmly “Are you Hari Seldon of Helicon?”
“I am.”
“And are you Dors Venabili of Cinna Mistress?”
“I am ” said Dors.
“I’m here to investigate a complaint that one Hari Seldon instigated a riot yesterday.”
“I did no such thing ” said Seldon.
“Our information is ” said Russ looking at the screen of a small computer pad “that you accused a newsman of being an Imperial agent thus instigating a riot against him.”
Dors said “It was I who said he was an Imperial agent Officer. I had reason to think he was. It is surely no crime to express one’
s opinion. The Empire has freedom of speech.”
“That does not cover an opinion deliberately advanced in order to instigate a riot.”
“How can you say it was Officer?”
At this point Mistress Tisalver interposed in a shrill voice “I can say it Officer. She saw there was a crowd present a crowd of gutter people who were just looking for trouble.
 She deliberately said he was an Imperial agent when she knew nothing of the sort and she shouted it to the crowd to stir them up.
 It was plain that she knew what she was doing.”
“Casilia ” said her husband pleadingly but she cast one look at him and he said no more.
Russ turned to Mistress Tisalver. “Did you lodge the complaint Mistress?”
“Yes. These two have been living here for a few days and they’ve done nothing but make trouble. They’ve invited people of low reputation into my apartment damaging my standing with my neighbours.”
“Is it against the law Officer ” asked Seldon “to invite clean quiet citizens of Dahl into one’s room? The two rooms upstairs are our rooms.
 We have rented them and they are paid for. Is it a crime to speak to Dahlites in Dahl Officer?”
“No it is not ” said Russ. “That is not part of the complaint. What gave you reason Mistress Venabili to suppose the person you so accused was in fact an Imperial agent?”
Doss said “He had a small brown mustache from which I concluded he was not a Dahlite. I surmised he was an Imperial agent”
“You surmised? Your associate Master Seldon has no mustache at all. Do you surmise he is an Imperial agent?”
“In any case ” said Seldon hastily “there was no riot. We asked the crowd to take no action against the supposed newsman and I’m sure they didn’t.”
“You’re sure Master Seldon?” said Russ. “Our information is that you left immediately after making your accusation. How could you witness what happened after you left?”
“I couldn’t ” said Seldon “but let me ask you-Is the man dead? Is the man hurt?”
“The man has been interviewed. He denies he is an Imperial agent and we have no information that he is. He also claims he was handled roughly.”
“He may well be lying in both respects ” said Seldon. “I would suggest a Psychic Probe.”
“That cannot be done on the victim of a crime ” said Russ. “The sector government is very firm on that. It might do if you two as the criminals in this case each underwent a Psychic Probe.
 Would you like us to do that?”
Seldon and Dors exchanged glances for a moment then Seldon said “No of course not.”
“Of course not ” repeated Russ with just a tinge of sarcasm in his voice “hut you’re ready enough to suggest it for someone else.”
The other officer Astinwald who had so far not said a word smiled at this.
Russ said “We also have information that two days ago you engaged in a knife fight in Billibotton and badly hurt a Dahlite citizen named”
-he struck a button on his computer pad and studied the new page on the screen- “Elgin Marron.”
Doss said “Dot your information tell you how the fight started?”
“That is irrelevant at the moment Mistress. Do you deny that the fight took place?”
“Of course we don’t deny the fight took place ” said Seldon hotly “but we deny that we in any way instigated that. We were attacked.
 Mistress Venabili was seized by this Marron and it was clear he was attempting to rape her. What happened afterward was pure self-defense. Or does Dahl condone rape?”
Russ said with very little intonation in his voice “You say you were attacked? By how many?”
“Ten men.”
“And you alone-with a woman-defended yourself against tea men?”
“Mistress Venabili and I defended ourselves. Yes.”
“How is it then that neither of you shows any damage whatever? Are either of you cut or bruised where it doesn’t show right now?”
“No Officer.”
“How is it then that in the fight of one-plus a woman-against ten you are in no way hurt but that the complainant Elgin Marron has been hospitalized with wounds and will require a skin transplant on his upper lip?”
“We fought well ” said Seldon grimly.
“Unbelievably well. What would you say if I told you that three men have testified that you and your friend attacked Marron unprovoked?”
“I would say that it belies belief that we should. I’m sure that Marron has a record as a brawler and knifeman. I tell you that there were ten there.
 Obviously six refused to swear to a lie. Do the other three explain why they did not come to the help of their friend if they witnessed him under unprovoked attack and in danger of his life?
 It must be clear to you that they are lying.”
“Do you suggest a Psychic Probe for them?”
“Yes. And before you ask I still refuse to consider one for us.”
Russ said “We have also received information that yesterday after leaving the scene of the riot you consulted with one Davan a known subversive who is wanted by the security police. Is that true?”
“You’ll have to prove that without help from us ” said Seldon. “We’re not answering any further questions.”
Russ put away his pad. “I’m afraid I must ask you to come with us to headquarters for further interrogation.”
“I don’t think that’s necessary Officer ” said Seldon. “We are Outworlders who have done nothing criminal. We have tried to avoid a newsman who was annoying us unduly we tried to protect ourselves against rape and possible murder in a part of the sector known for criminal behavior and we’
ve spoken to various Dahlites. We see nothing there to warrant our further questioning. It would come under the heading of harassment.”
“We make these decisions ” said Russ. “Not you. Will you please come with us?”
“No we will not ” said Dors.
“Watch out!” cried out Mistress Tisalver. “She’s got two knives.”
Officer Russ sighed and said “Thank you Mistress but I know she does.” He turned to Dors. “Do you know it’s a serious crime to carry a knife without a permit in this sector? Do you have a permit?”
“No Officer I don’t.”
“It was clearly with an illegal knife then that you assaulted Marron? Do you realize that that greatly increases the seriousness of the crime?”
“It was no crime Officer ” said Dors. “Understand that. Marron had a knife as well and no permit I am certain.”
“We have no evidence to that effect and while Marron has knife wounds neither of you have any.”
“Of course he had a knife Officer. If you don’t know that every man in Billibotton and most men elsewhere in Dahl carry knives for which they probably don’
t have permits then you’re the only man in Dahl who doesn’t know. There are shops here wherever you turn that sell knives openly. Don’t you know that?”
Russ said “It doesn’t matter what I know or don’t know in this respect. Nor does it matter whether other people are breaking the law or how many of them do.
 All that matters at this moment is that Mistress Venabili is breaking the anti-knife law. I must ask you to give up those knives to me right now Mistress and the two of you must then accompany me to headquarters.”
Dors said “In that case take my knives away from me.”
Russ sighed. “You must not think Mistress that knives are all the weapons there are in Dahl or that I need engage you in a knife fight.
 Both my partner and I have blasters that will destroy you in a moment before you can drop your hands to your knife hilt-however fast you are.
 We won’t use a blaster of course because we are not here to kill you. However each of us also has a neuronic whip which we can use on you freely.
 I hope you won’t ask for a demonstration. It won’t kill you do you permanent harm of any kind or leave any marksbut the pain is excruciating.
 My partner is holding a neuronic whip on you right now. And here is mine. -Now let us have your knives Mistress Venabili.”
There was a moment’s pause and then Seldon said “It’s no use Dors. Give him your knives.”
And at that moment a frantic pounding sounded at the door and they all heard a voice raised in high-pitched expostulation.
79.
Raych had not entirely left the neighborhood after he had walked them back to their apartment house.
He had eaten well while waiting for the interview with Davan to 6e done and later had slept a bit after finding a bathroom that more or less worked.
 He really had no place to go now that all that was done. He had a home of sorts and a mother who was not likely to be perturbed if he stayed away for a while. She never was.
He did not know who his father was and wondered sometimes if he really had one. He had been told he had to have one and the reasons for that had been explained to him crudely enough.
 Sometimes he wondered if he ought to believe so peculiar a story but he did find the details titillating.
He thought of that in connection with the lady. She was an old lady of course but she was pretty and she could fight like a man better than a man. It filled him with vague notions.
And she had offered to let him take a bath. He could swim in the Billibotton pool sometimes when he had some credits he didn’
t need for anything else or when he could sneak in. Those were the only times he got wet all over but it was chilly and he had to wait to get dry.
Taking a bath was different. There would be hoc water soap towels and warm air. He wasn’t sure what it would feel like except that it would be nice if she was there.
He was walkway-wise enough to know of places where he could park himself in an alley off a walkway that would 6e near a bathroom and still be near enough to where she was yet where he probably wouldn’
t be found and made to run away.
He spent the night thinking strange thoughts. What if he did learn to read and write? Could he do something with that? He wasn’
t sure what but maybe the could cell him. He had vague ideas of being paid money to do things he didn’t know how to do now but he didn’
t know what those things might be. He would have to be cold but how do you get told?
If he stayed with the man and the lady they might help. But why should they want him to stay with them?
He drowsed off coming to later not because the light was brightening but because his sharp ears caught the heightening and deepening of sounds from the walkway as the activities of the day began.
He had learned to identify almost every variety of sound because in the underground maze of Billibotton if you wanted to survive with even a minimum of comfort you had to be aware of things before you saw them.
 And there was something about the sound of a ground-car motor that he now heard that signaled danger to him. It had an official sound a hostile sound
He shook himself awake and stole quietly toward the walkway. He scarcely needed to see the Spaceship-and-Sun on the groundcar. Its lines were enough.
 He knew they had to be coming for the man and the lady because they had seen Davan. He did not pause to question his thoughts or to analyze them.
 He was off on a run beating his way through the gathering life of the day.
He was back in less than fifteen minutes. The ground-car was still there and there were curious and cautious onlookers gazing at it from all sides and from a respectful distance.
 There would soon be more. He pounded his way up the stairs trying to remember which door he should bang on. No time for the elevator.
He found the door-at least he thought he did—and he banged shouting in a squeak “Lady! Lady!”
He was too excited to remember her name but he remembered part of the man’s. “Hari!” he shouted. “Let me in.”
The door opened and he rushed in-tried to rush in. The rough hand of an officer seized his arm. “Hold it kid. Where do you think you’re going?”
“Leggo! I ain’t done nothin’.” He looked about. “Hey lady what’re they Join’?”
“Arresting us ” said Dors grimly.
“What for?” said Raych panting and struggling. “Hey leggo you Sunbadger. Don’t go with him lady. You don’t have to go with him. “
“You get out ” said Russ shaking the boy vehemently.
“No I ain’t You ain’t either Sunbadger. My whole gang is coming. You ain’t gettin’ out less’n you let these guys go.”
“What whole gang?” said Russ frowning.
“They’re right outside now. Prob’ly takin’ your ground-car apart. And they’ll take yore apart.”
Russ turned toward his partner “Call headquarters. Have them send out a couple of trucks with Macros.”
“No!” shrieked Raych breaking loose and rushing at Astinwald. “Don’t call!”
Russ levelled his neuronic whip and fired.
Raych shrieked grasped at his right shoulder and fell down wriggling madly.
Russ had not yet turned back to Seldon when the latter seizing him by the wrist pushed the neuronic whip up in the air and then around and behind while stamping on his foot to keep him relatively motionless.
 Hari could feel the shoulder dislocate even while Russ emitted a hoarse agonized yell.
Astinwald raised his blaster quickly but Dors’s left arm was around his shoulder and the knife in her right hand was at his throat.
“Don’t move!” she said. “Move a millimeter any part of you and I cut you through your neck to the spine. -Drop the blaster. Drop it! And the neuronic whip.”
Seldon picked up Raych still moaning and held him tightly. He turned to Tisalver and said “There are people out there. Angry people. I’
ll have them in here and they’ll break up everything you’ve got. They’ll smash the walls. If you don’t want that to happen pick up those weapons and throw them into the next room.
 Take the weapons from the security officer on the door and do the same. Quickly! Get your wife to help. She’ll think twice next time before sending in complaints against innocent people.
 -Dors this one on the floor won’t do anything for a while. Put the other one out of action but don’t kill him.”
“Right ” said Dors. Reversing her knife she struck him hard on the skull with the haft. He went to his knees.
She made a face. “I hate doing that.”
“They fired at Raych ” said Seldon trying to mask his own sick feeling at what had happened.
They left the apartment hurriedly and once out on the walkway found it choked with people almost all men who raised a shout when they saw them emerge.
 They pushed in close and the smell of poorly washed humanity was overpowering.
Someone shouted “Where are the Sunbadgers?”
“Inside ” called out Dors piercingly. “Leave them alone. They’ll be helpless for a while but they’ll get reinforcements so get out of here fast”
“What about you?” came from a dozen throats.
“We’re getting out too. We won’t be back.”
“I’ll take care of them ” shrilled Raych struggling out of Seldon’s arms and standing on his feet. He was rubbing his right shoulder madly. “I can walk. Lemme past.”
The crowd opened for him and he said “Mister lady come with me. Fast!”
They were accompanied down the walkway by several dozen men and then Raych suddenly gestured at an opening and muttered “In here folks. I’ll rake ya to a place no one will ever find ya.
 Even Davan prob’ly don’t know it. Only thing is we got to go through the sewer levels. No one will see us there but it’
s sort of stinky . . . know what I mean?”
“I imagine we’ll survive ” muttered Seldon.
And down they went along a narrow spiralling ramp and up rose the mephitic odors to greet them.
80.
Raych found them a hiding place. It had meant climbing up the metal rungs of a ladder and it had led them to a large loft like room the use of which Seldon could not imagine.
 It was filled with equipment bulky and silent the function of which also remained a mystery. The room was reasonably clean and free of dust and a steady draft of air wafted through that prevented the dust from settling and-more important seemed to lessen the odor.
Raych seemed pleased. “Ain’t this nice?” he demanded. He still rubbed his shoulder now and then and winced when he rubbed too hard.
“It could be worse ” said Seldon. “Do you know what this place is used for Raych?”
Raych shrugged or began to do so and winced. “I dunno ” he said. Then he added with a touch of swagger “Who cares?”
Dors who had sat down on the floor after brushing it with her hand and then looking suspiciously at her palm said “If you want a guess I think this is part of a complex that is involved in the detoxification and recycling of wastes.
 The stuff must surely end up as fertilizer.”
“Then ” said Seldon gloomily “those who run the complex will be down here periodically and may come at any moment for all we know.”
“I been here before ” said Raych. “I never saw no one here.”
“I suppose Trantor is heavily automated wherever possible and if anything calls for automation it would be this treatment of wastes ” said Dors. “We may be safe . . . for a while.”
“Not for long. We’ll get hungry and thirsty Dors.”
“I can get food and water for us ” said Raych. “Ya got to know how to make out if you’re an alley kid.”
“Thank you Raych ” said Seldon absently “but right now I’m not hungry.” He sniffed. “I may never be hungry again.”
“You will be ” said Dors “and even if you lose your appetite for a while you’ll get thirsty. At least elimination is no problem.
 We’re practically living over what is clearly an open sewer.”
There was silence for a while. The light was dim and Seldon wondered why the Trantorians didn’t keep it dark altogether. But then it occurred to him that he had never encountered true darkness in any public area.
 It was probably a habit in an energy-rich society. Strange that a world of forty billion should be energy-rich but with the internal heat of the planet to draw upon to say nothing of solar energy and nuclear fusion plants in space it was.
 In fact come to think of it there was no energy-poor planet in the Empire. Was there a time when technology had been so primitive that energy poverty was possible?
He leaned against a system of pipes through which-for all he knew sewage ran. He drew away from the pipes as the thought occurred to him and he sat down next to Dors.
He said “Is there any way we can get in touch with Chetter Hummin?”
Dors said “As a matter of fact I did send a message though I hated to.”
“You hated to?”
“My orders are to protect you. Each time I have to get in touch with him it means I’ve failed.”
Seldon regarded her out of narrowed eyes. “Do you have to be so compulsive Dons? You can’t protect me against the security officers of an entire sector.”
“I suppose not. We can disable a few“
“I know. We did. But they’ll send out reinforcements . . . armored ground-cars . . . neuronic cannon . . . sleeping mist.
 I’m not sure what they have but they’re going to throw in their entire armory. I’m sure of it.”
“You’re probably right ” said Dons her mouth tightening.
“They won’t find ya lady ” said Raych suddenly. His sharp eyes had moved from one to the other as they talked. “They never find Davan.”
Dors smiled without joy and ruffled the boy’s hair then looked at the palm of her hand with a little dismay. She said “I’
m not sure if you ought to stay with us Raych. I don’t want them finding you. “
“They won’t find me and if I leave ya who’ll get ya food and water and who’ll find ya new hidin’ places so the Sunbadgers’ll never know where to look?”
“No Raych they’ll find us. They don’t really look too hard for Davan. He annoys them but I suspect they don’t take him seriously. Do you know what I mean?”
“You mean he’s just a pain in the . . . the neck and they figure he ain’t worth chasing all over the lot.”
“Yes that’s what I mean. But you see we hurt two of the officers very badly and they’re not going to let us get away with that.
 If it takes their whole force-if they have to sweep through every hidden or unused corridor in the sector-they’ll get us.”
Raych said “That makes me feel like . . . like natin’n’. If I didn’t run in there and get zapped ya wouldn’
t have taken out them officers and ya wouldn’t be in such trouble.”
“No sooner or later we’d have-uh-taken them out. Who knows? We may have to take out a few more.”
“Well ya did it beautiful ” said Raych. “If I hadn’t been aching all over I could’ve watched more and enjoyed it.”
Seldon said “It wouldn’t do us any good to try to fight the entire security system. The question is: What will they do to us once they have us? A prison sentence surely.”
“Oh no. If necessary we’ll have to appeal to the Emperor ” put in Dors.
“The Emperor?” said Raych wide-eyed. “You know the Emperor?”
Seldon waved at the boy. “Any Galactic citizen can appeal to the Emperor. -That strikes me as the wrong thing to do Dors. Ever since Hummin and I left the Imperial Sector we’ve been evading the Emperor.”
“Not to the extent of being thrown into a Dahlite prison. The Imperial appeal will serve as a delay-in any case a diversionand perhaps in the course of that delay we can think of something else.”
“There’s Hummin.”
“Yes there is ” said Dors uneasily “but we can’t consider him the doit-all. For one thing even if my message reached him and even if he was able to rush to Dahl how would he find us here?
 And even if he did what could he do against the entire Dahlite security force?”
“In that case ” said Seldon. “We’re going to have to think of something we can do before they find us.”
Raych said “If ya follow me I can keep ya ahead of them. I know every place there is around here.”
“You can keep us ahead of one person but there’ll be a great many moving down any number of corridors. We’ll escape one group and bump into another.”
They sat in uncomfortable silence for a good while each confronting what seemed to 6e a hopeless situation. Then Dors Venabili stirred and said in a tense low whisper “They’re here. I hear them.”
For a while they strained listening then Raych sprang to his feet and hissed “They comin’ that way. We gotta go this way.”
Seldon confused heard nothing at all but would have been content to trust the others’ superior hearing but even as Raych began moving hastily and quietly away from the direction of the approaching tread a voice rang out echoing against the sewer walls.
 “Don’t move. Don’t move.”
And Raych said “That’s Davan. How’d he know we were here?”
“Davan?” said Seldon. “Are you sure?”
“Sure I’m sure. He’ll help.”
81.
Davan asked “What happened?”
Seldon felt minimally relieved. Surely the addition of Davan could scarcely count against the full force of the Dahl Sector but then again he commanded a number of people who might create enough confusion
He said “You should know Davan. I suspect that many of the crowd who were at Tisalver’s place this morning were your people.”
“Yes a number were. The story is that you were being arrested and that you manhandled a squadron of Sunbadgers. But why were you being arrested?”
“Two ” said Seldon lifting two fingers. “Two Sunbadgers. And that’s bad enough. Part of the reason we were being arrested was that we had gone to see you.”
“That’s not enough. The Sunbadgers don’t bother with me much as a general thing.” He added bitterly “They underestimate me.”
“Maybe ” said Seldon “out the woman from whom we rent our rooms reported us for having started a riot . . . over the newsman we ran into on our way to you.
 You know about that. With your people on the scene yesterday and again this morning and with two officers badly hurt they may well decide to clean out these corridorsand that means you will suffer.
 I really am sorry. I had no intention or expectation of being the cause of any of this.”
But Davan shook his head. “No you don’t know the Sunbadgers. That’s not enough either. They don’t want to clean us up.
 The sector would have to do something about us if they did. They’re only too happy to let us rot in Billibotton and the other slums.
 No they’re after you. What have you done?”
Dors said impatiently “We’ve done nothing and in any case what does it matter? If they’re not after you and they are after us they’
re going to come down here to flush us out. If you get in the way you’ll be in deep trouble.”
“No not me. I have friends-powerful friends ” said Davan. “I told you that last night. And they can help you as well as me.
 When you refused to help us openly I got in touch with them. They know who you are Dr. Seldon. You’re a famous man.
 They’re in a position to talk to the Mayor of Dahl and see to it that you are left alone whatever you have done.
 But you’ll have to be taken a way out of Dahl.”
Seldon smiled. Relief flooded over him. He said “You know someone powerful do you Davan? Someone who responds at once who has the ability to talk the Dahl government out of taking drastic steps and who can take us away?
 Good. I’m not surprised.” He turned to Dors smiling. “It’s Mycogen all over again. How does Hummin do it?”
But Dors shook her head. “Too quick. -I don’t understand.”
Seldon said “I believe he can do anything.”
“I know him better than you doand longerand I don’t believe that.”
Seldon smiled “Don’t underestimate him.” And then as though anxious not to linger longer on that subject he turned to Davan. “But how did you find us?
 Raych said you knew nothing about this place.”
“He don’t ” shrilled Raych indignantly. “This place is all mine. I found it.”
“I’ve never been here before ” said Davan looking about. “It’s an interesting place. Raych is a corridor creature perfectly at home in this maze.”
“Yes Davan we gathered as much ourselves. But how did you find it?”
“A heat-seeker. I have a device that detects infra-red radiation the particular thermal pattern that is given off at thirty-seven degrees Celsius.
 It will react to the presence of human beings and not to other heat sources. It reacted to you three.”
Dons was frowning. “What good is that on Trantor where there are human beings everywhere? They have them on other worlds but“
Davan said “But not on Trantor. I know. Except that they are useful in the slums in the forgotten decaying corridors and alleyways.”
“And where did you get it?” asked Seldon.
Davan said “It’s enough that I have it. but we’ve got to get you away Master Seldon. Too many people want you and I want my powerful friend to have you.”
“Where is he this powerful friend of yours?”
“He’s approaching. At least a new thirty-seven-degree source is registering and I don’t see that it can be anyone else.”
Through the door strode a newcomer but Seldon’s glad exclamation died on his lips. It was not Chetter Hummin.
Wye
WYE- . . . A sector of the world-city of Trantor . . . In the latter centuries of the Galactic Empire Wye was the strongest and stablest portion of the world-city.
 Its rulers had long aspired to the Imperial throne justifying that by their descent from early Emperors. Under Mannix IV Wye was militarized and (Imperial authorities later claimed) was planning a planet-wide coup .
ENCYCLOPEDIA GALACTICA
82.
The man who entered was tall and muscular. He had a long blond mustache that curled up at the tips and a fringe of hair that went down the sides of his face and under his chin leaving the point of his chin and his lower lip smoothly bare and seeming a little moist.
 His head was so closely cropped and his hair was so fight that for one unpleasant moment Seldon was reminded of Mycogen.
The newcomer wore what was unmistakably a uniform. It was red and white and about his waist was a wide belt decorated with silver studs.
His voice when he spoke was a rolling bass and its accent was not like any that Seldon had heard before. Most unfamiliar accents sounded uncouth in Seldon’
s experience but this one seemed almost musical perhaps because of the richness of the low tones.
“I am Sergeant Emmer Thalus ” he rumbled in a slow succession of syllables. “I have come seeking Dr. Hari Seldon.”
Seldon said “I am he.” In an aside to Dors he muttered “if Hummin couldn’t come himself he certainly sent a magnificent side of beef to represent him.”
The sergeant favored Seldon with a stolid and slightly prolonged look. Then he said “Yes. You have been described to me. Please come with me Dr. Seldon.”
Seldon said “Lead the way.”
The sergeant stepped backward. Seldon and Dors Venabili stepped forward.
The sergeant stopped and raised a large hand palm toward Dors. “I have been instructed to take Dr. Hari Seldon with me. I have not been instructed to take anyone else.”
For a moment Seldon looked at him uncomprehendingly. Then his look of surprise gave way to anger. “It’s quite impossible that you have been told that Sergeant.
 Dr. Dors Venabili is my associate and my companion. She must come with me.”
“That is nor in accordance with my instructions Doctor.”
“I don’t care about your instructions in any way Sergeant Thalus. I do not budge without her.”
“What’s more ” said Dors with clear irritation “my instructions are to protect Dr. Seldon at all times. I cannot do that unless I am with him. Therefore where he goes I go.”
The sergeant looked puzzled. “My instructions are strict that I see to it that no harm comes to you Dr. Seldon. If you will not come voluntarily I must carry you to my vehicle.
 I will try to do so gently.”
He extended his two arms as though to seize Seldon by the waist and carry him off bodily.
Seldon skittered backward and out of reach. As he did so the side of his fight palm came down on the sergeant’s right upper arm where the muscles were thinnest so that he struck the bone.
The sergeant drew a sudden deep breath and seemed to shake himself a bit but turned face expressionless and advanced again. Davan watching remained where he was motionless but Raych moved behind the sergeant
Seldon repeated his palm stroke a second time then a third but now Sergeant Thalus anticipating the blow lowered his shoulder to catch it on hard muscle.
Dors had drawn her knives.
“Sergeant ” she said forcefully. “Turn in this direction I want you to understand I may be forced to hurt you severely if you persist in attempting to carry Dr. Seldon off against his will.”
The sergeant paused seemed to take in the slowly waving knives solemnly then said “It is not in my instructions to refrain from harming anyone but Dr. Seldon.”
His right hand moved with surprising speed toward the neuronic whip in the holster at his hip. Dors moved as quickly forward knives flashing.
Neither completed the movement.
Dashing forward Raych had pushed at the sergeant’s back with his left hand and withdrew the sergeant’s weapon from its holster with his right He moved away quickly holding the neuronic whip in both hands now and shouting “Hands up Sergeant or you’re gonna get it!”
The sergeant whirled and a nervous look crossed his reddening face. It was the only moment that its stolidity had weakened. “Put that down sonny ”
 he growled. “You don’t know how it works.”
Raych howled “I know about the safety. It’s off and this thing can fire. And it will if you try to rush me.”
The sergeant froze. He clearly knew how dangerous it was to have an excited twelve-year-old handling a powerful weapon.
Nor did Seldon feel much better. He said “Careful Raych. Don’t shoot. Keep your finger off the contact.”
“I ain’t gonna let him rush me.”
“He won’t. -Sergeant please don’t move. Let’s get something straight. You were told to take me away from here. Is that right?”
“That’s right ” said the sergeant eyes somewhat protruding and firmly fixed on Raych (whose eyes were as firmly fixed on the sergeant).
“But you were not cold to take anyone else. Is that right?”
“No I was not Doctor ” said the sergeant firmly. Not even the threat of a neuronic whip was going to make him weasel. One could see that.
“Very well but listen to me Sergeant. Were you told not to take anyone else?”
“I just said-
“No no. Listen Sergeant. There’s a difference. Were your instructions simply ‘Take Dr. Seldon!’? Was that the entire order with no mention of anyone else or were the orders more specific?
 Were your orders as follows: ‘Take Dr. Seldon and don’t take anyone else’?”
The sergeant turned that over in his head then he said “I was told to take you Dr. Seldon.”
“Then there was no mention of anyone else one way or the other was there?”
Pause. “No.”
“You were not told to take Dr. Venabili but you were not told not to take Dr. Venabili either. Is that right?”
Pause. “Yes.”
“So you can either take her or not take her whichever you please?”
Long pause. “I suppose so.”
“Now then here’s Raych the young fellow who’s got a neuronic whip pointing at you your neuronic whip rememberand he is anxious to use it.”
“Yay!” shouted Raych.
“Not yet Raych ” said Seldon. “And here is Dr. Venabili with two knives that she can use very expertly and there’s myself who can if I get the chance break your Adam’
s apple with one hand so that you’ll never speak above a whisper again. Now then do you want to take Dr. Venabili or don’
t you want to? Your orders allow you to do either.”
And finally the sergeant said in a beaten voice “I will take the woman.”
“And the boy Raych.”
“And the boy.”
“Good. Have I your word of honor-your word of honor as a soldier that you will do as you have just said . . . honestly?”
“You have my word of honor as a soldier ” said the sergeant.
“Good. Raych give back the whip. -Now. -Don’t make me wait.”
Raych his face twisted into an unhappy grimace looked at Dors who hesitated and then slowly nodded her head. Her face was as unhappy as Raych’s.
Raych held out the neuronic whip to the sergeant and said “They’re makin’ me ya big” His last words were unintelligible.
Seldon said “Put away your knives Dors.”
Dors shook her head but put them away.
“Now Sergeant?” said Seldon.
The sergeant looked at the neuronic whip then at Seldon. He said “You are an honorable man Dr. Seldon and my word of honor holds.
” With a military snap he placed his neuronic whip in his holster.
Seldon turned to Davan and said “Davan please forget what you have seen here. We three are going voluntarily with Sergeant Thalus. You tell Yugo Amaryl when you see him that I will not forget him and that once this is over and I am free to act I will see that he gets into a University.
 And if there’s anything reasonable I can ever do for your cause Davan I will. -Now Sergeant let’s go.”
83.
“Have you ever been in an air-jet before Raych?” asked Hari Seldon.
Raych shook his head speechlessly. He was looking down at Upperside rushing beneath them with a mixture of fright and awe.
It struck Seldon again how much Trantor was a world of Expressways and tunnels. Even long trips were made underground 6y the general population. Air travel however common it might be on the Outworlds was a luxury on Trantor and an air-jet like this-
How had Hummin managed it? Seldon wondered.
He looked out the window at the rise and fall of the domes at the general green in this area of the planet the occasional patches of what were little less than jungles the arms of the sea they occasionally passed over with its leaden waters taking on a sudden all too-brief sparkle when the sun peeped out momentarily from the heavy cloud layer.
An hour or so into the flight Dors who was viewing a new historical novel without much in the way of apparent enjoyment clicked it off and said “I wish I knew where we were going.”
“If you can’t tell ” said Seldon “then I certainly can’t. You’ve been on Trantor longer than I have.”
“Yes but only on the inside ” said Dors. “Out here with only Upperside below me I’m as lost as an unborn infant would be.”
“Oh well. -Presumably Hummin knows what he’s doing.”
“I’m sure he does ” replied Dors rather tartly “but that may have nothing to do with the present situation. Why do you continue to assume any of this represents his initiative?”
Seldon’s eyebrows lifted. “Now that you ask I don’t know. I just assumed it. Why shouldn’t this be his?”
“Because whoever arranged it didn’t specify that I be taken along with you. I simply don’t see Hummin forgetting my existence. And because he didn’
t come himself as he did at Streeling and at Mycogen.”
“You can’t always expect him to Dors. He might well be occupied. The astonishing thing is nor that he didn’t come on this occasion but that he did come on the previous ones.”
“Assuming he didn’t come himself would he send a conspicuous and lavish flying palace like this?” She gestured around her at the large luxurious jet.
“It might simply have been available. And he might have reasoned that no one would expect something as noticeable as this to be carrying fugitives who were desperately trying to avoid detection. The well-known double-double-cross.”
“Too well-known in my opinion. And would he send an idiot like Sergeant Thalus in his place?”
“The sergeant is no idiot. He’s simply been trained to complete obedience. With proper instructions he could be utterly reliable.”
“There you are Hari. We come back to that. Why didn’t he get proper instructions? It’s inconceivable to me that Chetter Hummin would tell him to carry you out of Dahl and not say a word about me. Inconceivable.”
And to that Seldon had no answer and his spirits sank.
Another hour passed and Dors said “It looks as if it’s getting colder outside. The green of Upperside is turning brown and I believe the heaters have turned on.”
“What does that signify?”
“Dahl is in the tropic zone so obviously we’re going either north or southand a considerable distance too. If I had some notion in which direction the nightline was I could tell which.”
Eventually they passed over a section of shoreline where there was a rim of ice hugging the domes where they were rimmed by the sea.
And then quite unexpectedly the air-jet angled downward.
Raych screamed “We’re goin’ to hit! We’re goin’ to smash up!”
Seldon’s abdominal muscles tightened and he clutched the arms of his seat.
Dors seemed unaffected. She said “The pilots up front don’t seem alarmed. We’ll be tunneling.”
And as she said so the jet’s wings swept backward and under it and like a bullet the air-jet encored a tunnel. Blackness swept back over them in an instant and a moment later the lighting system in the tunnel turned on.
 The walls of the tunnel snaked past the jet on either side.
“I don’t suppose I’ll ever be sure they know the tunnel isn’t already occupied ” muttered Seldon.
“I’m sure they had reassurance of a clear tunnel some dozens of kilometers earlier ” said Dors. “At any rate I presume this is the last stage of the journey and soon we’ll know where we are.”
She paused and then added “And I further presume we won’t like the knowledge when we have it.”
84.
The air-jet sped out of the tunnel and onto a long runway with a roof so high that it seemed closer to true daylight than anything Seldon had seen since he had left the Imperial Sector.
They came to a halt in a shorter time than Seldon would have expected but at the price of an uncomfortable pressure forward. Raych in particular was crushed against the seat before him and was finding it difficult to breath rill Dors’
s hand on his shoulder pulled him back slightly.
Sergeant Thalus impressive and erect left the jet and moved to the rear where he opened the door of the passenger compartment and helped the three out one by one.
Seldon was last. He half-turned as he passed the sergeant saying “It was a pleasant trip Sergeant.”
A slow smite spread over the sergeant’s large face and lifted his moustached upper lip. He touched the visor of his cap in what was half a salute and said “Thank you again Doctor.”
They were then ushered into the backseat of a ground-car of lavish design and the sergeant himself pushed into the front seat and drove the vehicle with a surprisingly light touch.
They passed through wide roadways flanked by tall well-designed buildings all glistening in broad daylight. As elsewhere on Trantor they heard the distant drone of an Expressway.
 The walkways were crowded with what were for the most part well-dressed people. The surroundings were remarkably-almost excessively clean.
Seldon’s sense of security sank further. Dors’s misgivings concerning their destination now seemed justified after all. He leaned coward her and said “Do you think we are back in the Imperial Sector?”
She said “No the buildings are more rococo in the Imperial Sector and there’s less Imperial parkishness to this sector-if you know what I mean.”
“Then where are we Dors?
“We’ll have to ask I’m afraid Hari.”
It was not a long trip and soon they rolled into a car-bay that flanked an imposing four-story structure. A frieze of imaginary animals ran along the top decorated with strips of warm pink stone.
 It was an impressive facade with a rather pleasing design.
Seldon said “That certainly looks rococo enough.”
Dors shrugged uncertainly.
Raych whistled and said in a failing attempt to sound unimpressed “Hey look at that fancy place.”
Sergeant Thalus gestured to Seldom clearly indicating that he was to follow. Seldon hung back and also relying on the universal language of gesture held out both arms clearly including Dors and Raych.
The sergeant hesitated in a slightly hangdog fashion at the impressive pink doorway. His mustache almost seemed to droop.
Then he said gruffly “All three of you then. My word of honor holds. -Still others may not feel obligated by my own obligation you know.”
Seldon nodded. “I hold you responsible for your own deeds only Sergeant.”
The sergeant was clearly moved and for a moment his face lightened as though he was considering the possibility of shaking Seldon’s hand or expressing heartfelt his approval in some other way.
 He decided against it however and stepped onto the bottom step of the flight that led to the door. The stairs immediately began a stately upward movement.
Seldon and Dors stepped after him at once and kept their balance without much trouble. Raych who was momentarily staggered in surprise jumped onto the moving stairs after a short run shoved both hands into his pockets and whistled carelessly.
The door opened and two women stepped out one on either side in symmetrical fashion. They were young and attractive. Their dresses belted tightly about the waist and reaching nearly to their ankles fell in crisp pleats and rustled when they walked.
 Both had brown hair that was coiled in thick plaits on either side of their heads. (Seldon found it attractive but wondered how long it took them each morning to arrange it just so.
 He had not been aware of so elaborate a coiffure on the women they had passed in the streets.)
The two women stared at the newcomers with obvious contempt. Seldon was not surprised. After the day’s events he and Dors looked almost as disreputable as Raych.
Yet the women managed to bow decorously and then made a half-turn and gestured inward in perfect unison and with symmetry carefully maintained. (Did they rehearse these things?
) It was clear that the three were to enter.
They stepped through an elaborate room cluttered with furniture and decorative items whose use Seldon did not readily understand. The floor was light-colored springy and glowed with luminescence.
 Seldon noted with some embarrassment that their footwear left dusty marks upon it.
And then an inner door was flung open and yet another woman emerged. She was distinctly older than the first two (who sank slowly as she came in crossing their legs symmetrically as they did so in a way that made Seldon marvel that they could keep their balance;
 it undoubtedly took a deal of practice).
Seldon wondered if he too was expected to display some ritualized form of respect but since he hadn’t the faintest notion of what this might consist of he merely bowed his head slightly.
 Dors remained standing erect and it seemed to Seldon did so with disdain. Raych was staring open-mouthed in all directions and looked as though he didn’
t even see the woman who had just entered.
She was plump-nor fat but comfortably padded. She wore her hair precisely as the young ladies did and her dress was in the same style but much more richly ornamented-too much so to suit Seldon’s aesthetic notions.
She was clearly middle-aged and there was a hint of gray in her hair but the dimples in her cheeks gave her the appearance of having rather more than a dash of youth.
 Her light brown eyes were merry and on the whole she looked more motherly than old.
She said “How are you? All of you.” (She showed no surprise at the presence of Dors and Raych but included them easily in her greeting.
) “I’ve been waiting for you for some time and almost had you on Upperside at Streeling. You are Dr. Hari Seldon whom I’
ve been looking forward to meeting. You I think must be Dr. Dors Venabili for you had been reported to be in his company. This young man I fear I do not know but I am pleased to see him.
 But we must not spend our time talking for I’m sure you would like to rest first.”
“And bathe Madam ” said Dors rather forcefully “Each of us could use a thorough shower.”
“Yes certainly ” said the woman “and a change in clothing. Especially the young man.” She looked down at Raych without any of the look of contempt and disapproval that the two young women had shown.
She said “What is your name young man?”
“Raych ” said Raych in a rather choked and embarrassed voice. He then added experimentally “Missus.”
“What an odd coincidence ” said the woman her eyes sparkling. “An omen perhaps. My own name is Rashelle. Isn’t that odd?
 but come. We shall take care of you all. Then there will be plenty of time to have dinner and to talk.”
“Wait Madam ” said Dors. “May I ask where we are?”
“Wye dear. And please call me Rashelle as you come to feel more friendly. I am always at ease with informality.”
Dors stiffened. “Are you surprised that we ask? Isn’t it natural that we should wane to know where we are?”
Rashelle laughed in a pleasant tinkling manner. “Really Dr. Venabili something must be done about the name of this place. I was not asking a question but making a statement.
 You asked where you were and I did not ask you why. I told you Wye.’ You are in the Wye Sector.”
“In Wye?” said Seldon forcibly.
“Yes indeed Dr. Seldon. We’ve wanted you from the day you addressed the Decennial Convention and we are so glad to have you now.”
85.
Actually it took a full day to rest and unstiffen to wash and get clean to obtain new clothes (satiny and rather loose in the style of Wye) and to sleep a good deal.
It was during the second evening in Wye that there was the dinner that Madam Rashelle had promised.
The table was a large one-too large considering that there were only four dining: Hari Seldon Dors Venabili Raych and Rashelle. The walls and ceiling were softly illuminated and the colors changed at a rate that caught the eye but not so rapidly as in any way to discommode the mind.
 The very tablecloth which was not cloth (Seldon had not made up his mind what it might be) seemed to sparkle.
The servers were many and silent and when the door opened it seemed to Seldon that he caught a glimpse of soldiers armed and at the ready outside.
 The room was a velvet glove but the iron fist was not far distant.
Rashelle was gracious and friendly and had clearly taken a particular liking to Raych who she insisted was to sit next to her.
Raych-scrubbed polished and shining all but unrecognizable in his new clothes with his hair clipped cleaned and brushed — scarcely dared to say a word.
 It was as though he felt his grammar no longer fit his appearance. He was pitifully ill at ease and he watched Dors carefully as she switched from utensil to utensil trying to match her exactly in every respect.
The food was tasty but spicy-to the point where Seldon could not recognize the exact nature of the dishes.
Rashelle her plump face made happy by her gentle smile and her fine teeth gleaming white said “You may think we have Mycogenian additives in the food but we do not.
 It is all homegrown in Wye. There is no sector on the planet more self-sufficient than Wye. We labor hard to keep that so.”
Seldon nodded gravely and said “Everything you have given us is first-rate Rashelle. We are much obliged to you.”
And yet within himself he thought the food was not quite up to Mycogenian standards and he felt moreover as he had earlier muttered to Dors that he was celebrating his own defeat.
 Or Hummin’s defeat at any rare and that seemed to him to be the same thing.
After all he had been captured by Wye the very possibility that had so concerned Hummin at the time of the incident Upperside.
Rashelle said “Perhaps in my role as hostess I may be forgiven if I ask personal questions. Am I correct in assuming that you three do not represent a family;
 that you Hari and you Dors are not married and that Raych is not your son?”
“The three of us are not related in any way ” said Seldon. “Raych was born on Trantor I on Helicon Dors on Cinna.”
“And how did you all meet then?”
Seldon explained briefly and with as little detail as he could manage . “There’s nothing romantic or significant in the meetings ” he added.
“Yet I am given to understand that you raised difficulties with my personal aide Sergeant Thalus when he wanted to take only you out of Dahl.”
Seldon said gravely “I had grown fond of Dors and Raych and did not wish to be separated from them.”
Rashelle smiled and said “You are a sentimental man I see.”
“Yes I am. Sentimental. And puzzled too.”
“Puzzled?”
“Why yes. And since you were so kind as to ask personal questions of us may I ask one as well?”
“Of course my dear Hari. Ask anything you please.”
“When we first arrived you said that Wye has wanted me from the day I addressed the Decennial Convention. For what reason might that be?”
“Surely you are not so simple as not to know. We want you for your psychohistory.”
“That much I do understand. But what makes you think that having me means you have psychohistory?”
“Surely you have not been so careless as to lose it.”
“Worse Rashelle. I have never had it”
Rashelle’s face dimpled. “But you said you had it in your talk. Not that I understood your talk. I am not a mathematician.
 I hate numbers. But I have in my employ mathematicians who have explained to me what it is you said.”
“In that case my dear Rashelle you must listen more closely. I can well imagine they have cold you that I have proven that psychohistorical predictions are conceivable but surely they must also have cold you that they are not practical.”
“I can’t believe that Hari. The very next day you were called into an audience with that pseudo-Emperor Cleon.”
“The pseudo-Emperor?” murmured Dors ironically.
“Why yes ” said Rashelle as though she was answering a serious question. “Pseudo-Emperor. He has no true claim to the throne.”
“Rashelle ” said Seldon brushing that aside a bit impatiently “I told Cleon exactly what I have just told you and he let me go.”
Now Rashelle did nor smile. A small edge crept into her voice. “Yes he let you go the way the cat in the fable lets a mouse go.
 He has been pursuing you ever since-in Streeling in Mycogen in Dahl. He would pursue you here if he dared. But come now-our serious talk is too serious.
 Let us enjoy ourselves. Let us have music.”
And at her words there suddenly sounded a soft but joyous instrumental melody. She leaned toward Raych and said softly “My boy if you are not at ease with the fork use your spoon or your fingers. I won’t mind.”
Raych said “Yes mum ” and swallowed hard but Dors caught his eye and her lips silently mouthed: “Fork.”
He remained with his fork.
Dors said “The music is lovely Madam”-she pointedly rejected the familiar form of address “but it must not he allowed to distract us.
 There is the thought in my mind that the pursuer in all those places might have been in the employ of the Wye Sector. Surely you would not be so well acquainted with events if Wye were not the prime mover.”
Rashelle laughed aloud. “Wye has its eyes and ears everywhere of course but we were not the pursuers. Had we been you would have been picked up without fail-as you were in Dahl finally when indeed we were the pursuers.
 When however there is a pursuit that fails a grasping hand that misses you may be sure that it is Demerzel.”
“Do you think so little of Demerzel?” murmured Dors.
“Yes. Does that surprise you? We have beaten him.”
“You? Or the Wye Sector?”
“The sector of course but insofar as Wye is the victor then I am the victor.”
“How strange ” said Dors. “There seems to be a prevalent opinion throughout Trantor that the inhabitants of Wye have nothing to do with victory with defeat or with anything else.
 It is felt that there is but one will and one fist in Wye and that is that of the Mayor. Surely youor any other Wyan-weigh nothing in comparison.”
Rashelle smiled broadly. She paused to look at Raych benevolently and to pinch his cheek then said “If you believe that our Mayor is an autocrat and that there is but one will that sways Wye then perhaps you are right.
 But even so I can still use the personal pronoun for my will is of account.”
“Why yours?” said Seldon. “Why not?” said Rashelle as the servers began clearing the table. “I am the Mayor of Wye.”
86.
It was Raych who was the first to react to the statement. Quite forgetting the cloak of civility that sat upon him so uncomfortably he laughed raucously and said “Hey lady ya can’t be Mayor. Mayors is guys.”
Rashelle looked at him good-naturedly and said in a perfect imitation of his tone of voice “Hey kid some Mayors is guys and some Mayors is dames.
 Put that under your lid and let it bubble.”
Raych’s eyes protruded and he seemed stunned. Finally he managed to say “Hey ya talk regular lady.”
“Sure thing. Regular as ya want ” said Rashelle still smiling.
Seldon cleared his throat and said “That’s quite an accent you have Rashelle.”
Rashelle tossed her head slightly. “I haven’t had occasion to use it in many years but one never forgets. I once had a friend a good friend who was a Dahlite-when I was very young.
” She sighed. “He didn’t speak that way of course-he was quite intelligent but he could do so if he wished and he taught me.
 It was exciting to talk so with him. It created a world that excluded our surroundings. It was wonderful. It was also impossible. My father made that plain.
 And now along comes this young rascal Raych to remind me of those long-ego days. He has the accent the eyes the impudent cast of countenance and in six years or so he will be a delight and terror to the young women. Won’t you Raych?”
Raych said “I dunno lady-uh mum.”
“I’m sure you will and you will come to look very much like my . . . old friend and it will be much more comfortable for me not to see you then.
 And now dinner’s over and it’s time for you to go to your room Raych. You can watch holovision for a while if you wish. I don’t suppose you read.”
Raych reddened. “I’m gonna read someday. Master Seldon says I’m gonna.”
“Then I’m sure you will.”
A young woman approached Raych curtsying respectfully in Rashelle’s direction. Seldon had not seen the signal that had summoned her.
Raych said “Can’t I stay with Master Seldon and Missus Venabili?”
“You’ll see them later ” said Rashelle gently “but Master and Missus and I have to Talk right now-so you must go.”
Dors mouthed a firm “Go!” at Raych and with a grimace the boy slid out of his chair and followed the attendant.
Rashelle turned to Seldon and Dors once Raych was gone and said “The boy will be safe of course and treated well. Please have no fears about that.
 And I will be safe too. As my woman approached just now so will a dozen armed menand much more rapidly-when summoned. I want you to understand that.”
Seldon said evenly “We are in no way thinking of attacking you Rashelleor must I now say ‘Madam Mayor’?”
“Still Rashelle. I am given to understand that you are a wrestler of sorts Hari and you Dors are very skillful with the knives we have removed from your room.
 I don’t want you to rely uselessly on your skills since I want Hari alive unharmed and friendly.”
“It is quite well understood Madam Mayor ” said Dors her lack of friendship uncompromised “that the ruler of Wye now and for the past forty years is Mannix Fourth of that Name and that he is still alive and in full possession of his faculties. Who then are you really?”
“Exactly who I say I am Dors. Mannix IV is my father. He is as you say still alive and in possession of his faculties.
 In the eyes of the Emperor and of all the Empire he is Mayor of Wye but he is weary of the strains of power and is willing at last to let them slip into my hands which are just as willing to receive them.
 I am his only child and I was brought up all my life to rule. My father is therefore Mayor in law and name but I am Mayor in fact.
 It is to me now that the armed forces of Wye have sworn allegiance and in Wye that is all that counts.”
Seldon nodded. “Let it be as you say. But even so whether it is Mayor Mannix IV or Mayor Rashelle I-it is the First I suppose there is no purpose in your holding me.
 I have told you that I don’t have a workable psychohistory and I do not think that either I or anyone else will ever have one.
 I have cold that to the Emperor. I am of no use either to you or to him.”
Rashelle said “How naive you are. Do you know the history of the Empire?”
Seldon shook his head. “I have recently come to wish that I knew it much better.”
Dors said dryly “I know Imperial history quite well though the pre-Imperial age is my specialty Madam Mayor. But what does it matter whether we do or do not?”
“If you know your history you know that the House of Wye is ancient and honorable and is descended from the Dacian dynasty.”
Dors said “The Dacians ruled five thousand years ago. The number of their descendants in the hundred and fifty generations that have lived and died since then may number half the population of the Galaxy-if all genealogical claims however outrageous are accepted.”
“Our genealogical claims Dr. Venabili”-Rashelle’s tone of voice was for the first time cold and unfriendly and her eyes flashed like steel“are not outrageous.
 They are fully documented. The House of Wye has maintained itself consistently in positions of power through all those generations and there have been occasions when we have held the Imperial throne and have ruled as Emperors.”
“The history book-films ” said Dors “usually refer to the Wye rulers as ‘anti-Emperors ‘ never recognized by the bulk of the Empire.”
“It depends on who writes the history book-films. In the future we wilt for the throne which has been ours will be ours again.”
“To accomplish that you must bring about civil war.”
“There won’t be much risk of that ” said Rashelle. She was smiling again. “That is what I must explain to you because I want Dr.
 Seldon’s help in preventing such a catastrophe. My father Mannix IV has been a man of peace all his life. He has been loyal to whomever it might be that ruled in the Imperial Palace and he has kept Wye a prosperous and strong pillar of the Trantorian economy for the good of all the Empire.”
“I don’t know that the Emperor has ever trusted him any the more for all that ” said Dors.
“I’m sure that is so ” said Rashelle calmly “for the Emperors that have occupied the Palace in my father’s time have known themselves to be usurpers of a usurping line.
 Usurpers cannot afford to trust the true rulers. And yet my father has kept the peace. He has of course developed and trained a magnificent security force to maintain the peace prosperity and stability of the sector and the Imperial authorities have allowed this because they wanted Wye peaceful prosperous stableand loyal.”
“But is it loyal?” said Dors.
“To the true Emperor of course ” said Rashelle “and we have now reached the stage where our strength is such that we can take over the government quickly-in a lightning stroke in factand before one can say ‘civil war’
 there will be a true Emperoror Empress if you preferand Trantor will be as peaceful as before.”
Dors shook her head. “May I enlighten you? As a historian?”
“I am always willing to listen.” And she inclined her head ever so slightly toward Dors.
“Whatever size your security force may be however well-trained and well-equipped they cannot possibly equal in size and strength the Imperial forces backed by twenty-five million worlds.”
“Ah but you have put your finger on the usurper’s weakness Dr. Venabili. There are twenty-five million worlds with the Imperial forces scattered over them.
 Those forces are thinned out over incalculable space under uncounted officers none of them particularly ready for any action outside their own Provinces many ready for action in their own interest rather than in the Empire’
s. Our forces on the other hand are all here all on Trantor. We can act and conclude before the distant generals and admirals can get it through their heads that they are needed.”
“But that response will comeand with irresistible force.”
“Are you certain of that?” said Rashelle. “We will be in the Palace. Trantor will be ours and at peace. Why should the Imperial forces stir when by minding their own business each petty military leader can have his own world to rule his own Province?”
“But is that what you want?” asked Seldon wonderingly. “Are you telling me that you look forward to ruling over an Empire that will break up into splinters?”
Rashelle said “That is exactly right. I would rule over Trantor over its outlying space settlements over the few nearby planetary systems that are part of the Trantorian Province.
 I would much rather be Emperor of Trantor than Emperor of the Galaxy.”
“You would be satisfied with Trantor only ” said Dors in tones of the deepest disbelief.
“Why not?” said Rashelle suddenly ablaze. She leaned forward eagerly both hands pressed palms-down on the table. “That is what my father has been planning for forty years.
 He is only clinging to life now to witness its fulfillment. Why do we need millions of worlds distant worlds that mean nothing to us that weaken us that draw our forces far away from us into meaningless cubic parsecs of space that drown us in administrative chaos that ruin us with their endless quarrels and problems when they are all distant nothings as far as we are concerned?
 Our own populous world-our own planetary city-is Galaxy enough for us. We have all we need to support ourselves. As for the rest of the Galaxy let it splinter.
 Every petty militarist can have his own splinter. They needn’t fight. There will be enough for all.”
“But they will fight just the same ” said Dors. “Each will refuse to be satisfied with his Province. Each will feat that his neighbor is not satisfied with his Province.
 Each will feel insecure and will dream of Galactic rule as the only guarantee of safety. This is certain Madam Empress of Nothing. There will be endless wars into which you and Trantor will be inevitably drawn-to the ruin of all.”
Rashelle said with clear contempt “So it might seem if one could see no farther than you do if one relied on the ordinary lessons of history.”
“What is there to see farther?” retorted Dors. “What is one to rely on beyond the lessons of history?”
“What lies beyond?” said Rashelle. “Why he.’”
And her arm shot outward her index finger jabbing toward Seldon.
“Me?” said Seldon. “I have already told you that psychohistory“
Rashelle said “Do not repeat what you have already said my good Dr. Seldon. We gain nothing by that. -Do you think Dr.
 Venabili that my father was never aware of the danger of endless civil war? Do you think he did not bend his powerful mind to thinking of some way to prevent that?
 He has been prepared at any time these last ten years to take over the Empire in a day. It needed only the assurance of security beyond victory.”
“Which you can’t have ” said Dors.
“Which we had the moment we heard of Dr. Seldon’s paper at the Decennial Convention. I saw at once that that was what we needed.
 My father was too old to see the significance at once. When I explained it however he saw it too and it was then that he formally transferred his power to me.
 So it is to you Hari that I owe my position and to you I will owe my greater position in the future.”
“I keep telling you that it cannot” began Seldon with deep annoyance.
“It is not important what can or cannot be done. What is important is what people will or will not believe can be done. They will believe you Hari when you tell them the psychohistoric prediction is that Trantor can rule itself and that the Provinces can become Kingdoms that will live together in peace.”
“I will make no such prediction ” said Seldon “in the absence of true psychohistory. I won’t play the charlatan. If you want something like that you say it.”
“Now Hari. They won’t believe me. It’s you they will believe. The great mathematician. Why not oblige them?”
“As it happens ” said Seldom “the Emperor also thought to use me as a source of self-serving prophecies. I refused to do it for him so do you think I will agree to do it for you?”
Rashelle was silent for a while and when she spoke again her voice had lost its intense excitement and became almost coaxing.
“Hari ” she said “think a little of the difference between Cleon and myself. What Cleon undoubtedly wanted from you was propaganda to preserve his throne.
 It would be useless to give him that for the throne can’t be preserved. Don’t you know that the Galactic Empire is in a state of decay that it cannot endure for much longer?
 Trantor itself is slowly sliding into ruin because of the ever-increasing weight of administering twenty-five million worlds. What’s ahead of us is breakup and civil war no matter what you do for Cleon.”
Seldon said “I have heard something like this said. It may even be true but what then?”
“Well then help it break into fragments without any war. Help me take Trantor. Help me establish a firm government over a realm small enough to 6e ruled efficiently.
 Let me give freedom to the rest of the Galaxy each portion to go its own way according to its own customs and cultures. The Galaxy will become a working whole again through the free agencies of trade tourism and communication and the fate of cracking into disaster under the present rule of force that barely holds it together will be averted.
 My ambition is moderate indeed; one world not millions; peace not war; freedom not slavery. Think about it and help me.”
Seldon said “Why should the Galaxy believe me any more than they would believe you? They don’t know me and which of our fleet commanders will be impressed by the mere word ‘psychohistory’?”
“You won’t be believed now but I don’t ask for action now. The House of Wye having waited thousands of years can wait thousands of days more.
 Cooperate with me and I will make your name famous. I will make the promise of psychohistory glow through all the worlds and at the proper time when I judge the movement to be the chosen moment you will pronounce your prediction and we will strike.
 Then in a twinkling of history the Galaxy will exist under a New Order that will render it stable and happy for eons. Come now Hari can you refuse me?”
Overthrow
THALUS EMMER- . . . A sergeant in the armed security forces of the Wye Sector of ancient Trantor . . .
. . . Aside from these totally unremarkable vital statistics nothing is known of the man except that on one occasion he held the fate of the Galaxy in his fist.
ENCYCLOPEDIA GALACTICA
87.
Breakfast the next morning was served in an alcove near the rooms of the captured three and it was luxurious indeed. There certainly was a considerable variety to the food and more than enough of everything.
Seldon sat at the breakfast table with a mound of spicy sausages before him totally ignoring Dors Venabili’s gloomy predictions concerning stomachs and colic.
Raych said “The dame . . . the Madam Mayor said when she came to see me last night“
“She came to see you?” said Seldon.
“Yeah. She said she wanted to make sure I was comfortable. She said when she had a chance she would take me to a zoo.”
“A zoo?” Seldon looked at Dors. “What kind of zoo can they have on Trantor? Cats and dogs?”
“There are some aboriginal animals ” said Dors “and I imagine they import some aboriginals from other worlds and there are also the shared animals that all the worlds have-other worlds having more than Trantor of course.
 As a matter of fact Wye has a famous zoo probably the best on the planet after the Imperial Zoo itself.”
Raych said “She’s a nice old lady.”
“Not that old ” said Dors “but she’s certainly feeding us well.”
“There’s that ” admitted Seldon.
When breakfast was over Raych left to go exploring.
Once they had retired to Dors’s room Seldon said with marked discontent “I don’t know how long we’ll be left to ourselves.
 She’s obviously plotted ways of preoccupying our time.”
Dors said “Actually we have little to complain of at the moment. We’re much more comfortable here than we were either in Mycogen or Dahl.”
Seldon said “Dors you’re not being won over by that woman are you?”
“Me? By Rashelle? Of course not. How can you possibly think so?”
“Welt you’re comfortable. You’re well-fed. It would be natural to relax and accept what fortune brings.”
“Yes very natural. And why not do that?”
“Look you were telling me last night about what’s going to happen if she wins out. I may not be much of a historian myself but I am willing to take your word for it and actually it makes sense even to a nonhistorian.
 The Empire will shatter and its shards will be fighting each other for . . . for . . . indefinitely. She must be stopped.”
“I agree ” said Dors. “She must be. What I fail to see is how we can manage to do that little thing right at this moment.
” She looked at Seldon narrowly. “Hari you didn’t sleep fast night did you?”
“Did you?” It was apparent he had not.
Dors stared at him a troubled look clouding her face. “Have you lain awake thinking of Galactic destruction because of what I said?”
“That and some other things. Is it possible to reach Chetter Hummin?” This last was said in a whisper.
Dors said “I tried to reach him when we first had to flee arrest in Dahl. He didn’t come. I’m sure he received the message but he didn’
t come. It may be that for any of a number of reasons he just couldn’t come to us but when he can he will.”
“Do you suppose something has happened to him?”
“No ” said Dors patiently. “I don’t think so.”
“How can you know?”
“The word would somehow get to me. I’m sure of it. And the word hasn’t gotten to me.”
Seldon frowned and said “I’m not as confident as you are about all this. In fact I’m not confident at all. Even if Hummin came what can he do in this case?
 He can’t fight all of Wye. If they have as Rashelle claims the best-organized army on Trantor what will he be able to do against it?”
“There’s no point in discussing that. Do you suppose you can convince Rashelle-bang it into her head somehow-that you don’t have psychohistory?”
“I’m sure she’s aware that I don’t have it and that I’m not going to get it for many years-if at all.
 But she’ll say I have psychohistory and if she does that skillfully enough people will believe her and eventually they will act on what she says my predictions and pronouncements areeven if I don’t say a word.”
“Surely that will take rime. She won’t build you up overnight. Or in a week. To do it properly it might take her a year.”
Seldon was pacing the length of the room turning sharply on his heel and striding back. “That might be so but I don’t know.
 There would be pressure on her to do things quickly. She doesn’t strike me as the kind of woman who has cultivated the habit of patience.
 And her old father Mannix IV would be even more impatient. He must feel the nearness of death and if he’s worked for this all his life he would much prefer to see it done a week before his death rather than a week after.
 Besides” Here he paused and looked around the empty room.
“Besides what?”
“Well we must have our freedom. You see I’ve solved the psychohistory problem.”
Dors’s eyes widened. “You have it! You’ve worked it out.”
“Not worked it out in the full sense. That might take decades . . . centuries for all I know. But I now know it’
s practical not just theoretical. I know it can be done so I must have the time the peace the facilities to work at it.
 The Empire must be held together till Ior possibly my successors-will learn how best to keep it so or how to minimize the disaster if it does split up despite us.
 It was the thought of having a beginning to my task and of not being able to work at it that kept me up last night.”
88.
It was their fifth day in Wye and in the morning Dors was helping Raych into a formal costume that neither was quite familiar with.
Raych looked at himself dubiously in the holo-mirror and saw a reflected image that faced him with precision imitating all his motions but without any inversion of left and right.
 Raych had never used a holo-mirror before and had been unable to keep from trying to feel it then laughing almost with embarrassment when his hand passed through it while the image’
s hand poked ineffectually at his real body.
He said at last “I look funny.”
He studied his tunic which was made of a very pliant material with a thin filigreed belt then passed his hands up a stiff collar that rose like a cup past his ears on either side.
“My head looks like a ball inside a bowl.”
Dors said “But this is the sort of thing rich children wear in Wye. Everyone who sees you will admire you and envy you.”
“With my hair all stuck down?”
“Certainly. You’ll wear this round little hat.”
“It’ll make my head more like a ball.”
“Then don’t let anyone kick it. Now remember what I told you. Keep your wits about you and don’t act like a kid.”
“But I am a kid ” he said looking up at her with a wide-eyed innocent expression.
“I’m surprised to hear you say that ” said Dors. “I’m sure you think of yourself as a twelve-year-old adult.”
Raych grinned. “Okay. I’ll be a good spy.”
“That’s not what I’m telling you to be. Don’t take chances. Don’t sneak behind doors to listen. If you get caught at it you’
re no good to anyone-especially not to yourself.”
“Aw c’mon Missus what do ya think I am? A kid or somethin’?”
“You just said you were didn’t you Raych? You just listen to everything that’s said without seeming to. And remember what you hear.
 And tell us. That’s simple enough.”
“Simple enough for you to say Missus Venabili ” said Raych with a grin “and simple enough for me to do.”
“And be careful.”
Raych winked. “You bet.”
A flunky (as coolly impolite as only an arrogant flunky can be) came to take Raych to where Rashelle was awaiting him.
Seldon looked after them and said thoughtfully “He probably won’t see the zoo he’ll be listening so carefully. I’m not sure it’
s right to thrust a boy into danger like that.”
“Danger? I doubt it. Raych was brought up in the slums of Billibotton remember. I suspect he has more alley smarts than you and I put together.
 Besides Rashelle is fond of him and will interpret everything he does in his favor. -Poor woman.”
“Are you actually sorry for her Dors?”
“Do you mean that she’s not worth sympathy because she’s a Mayor’s daughter and considers herself a Mayor in her own right and because she’
s intent on destroying the Empire? Perhaps you’re right but even so there are some aspects of her for which one might show some sympathy.
 For instance she’s had an unhappy love affair. That’s pretty evident. Undoubtedly her heart was broken-for a time at least.”
Seldon said “Have you ever had an unhappy love affair Dors?”
Der considered for a moment or two then said “Not really. I’m too involved with my work to get a broken heart.”
“I thought as much.”
“Then why did you ask?”
“I might have been wrong.”
“How about you?”
Seldon seemed uneasy. “As a matter of fact yes. I have spared the time for a broken heart. Badly cracked anyway.”
“I thought as much.”
“Then why did you ask?”
“Not because I thought I might be wrong I promise you. I just wanted to see if you would lie. You didn’t and I’m glad.”
There was a pause and then Seldon said “Five days have passed and nothing has happened.”
“Except that we are being treated well Hari.”
“If animals could think they’d think they were being treated well when they were only being fattened for the slaughter.”
“I admit she’s fattening the Empire for the slaughter.”
“But when?”
“I presume when she’s ready.”
“She boasted she could complete the coup in a day and the impression I got was that she could do that on any day.”
“Even if she could she would want to make sure that she could cripple the Imperial reaction and that might take time.”
“How much time? She plans to cripple the reaction by using me but she is making no effort to do so. There is no sign that she’
s trying to build up my importance. Wherever I go in Wye I’m unrecognized. There are no Wyan crowds gathering to cheer me. There’s nothing on the news holocasts.”
Dors smiled. “One would almost suppose that your feelings are hurt at not being made famous. You’re naive Hari. Or not a historian which is the same thing.
 I think you had better be more pleased that the study of psychohistory will be bound to make a historian of you than that it may save the Empire.
 If all human beings understood history they might cease making the same stupid mistakes over and over.”
“In what way am I native?” asked Seldom lifting his head and staring down his nose at her.
“Don’t be offended Hari. I think it’s one of your attractive features actually.”
“I know. It arouses your maternal instincts and you have been asked to take care of me. But in what way am I naive?”
“In thinking that Rashelle would cry to propagandize the population of the Empire generally into accepting you as seer. She would accomplish nothing in that way.
 Quadrillions of people are hard to move quickly. There is social and psychological inertia as well as physical inertia. And by coming out into the open she would simply alert Demerzel.”
“Then what is she doing?”
“My guess is that the information about you-suitably exaggerated and glorified-is going out to a crucial few. It is going to those Viceroys of sectors those admirals of fleets those people of influence she feels look kindly.
 upon heror grimly upon the Emperor. A hundred or so of those who might rally to her side will manage to confuse the Loyalists just long enough to allow Rashelle the First to set up her New Order firmly enough to beat off whatever resistance might develop.
 At least I imagine that is how she reasons.”
“And yet we haven’t heard from Hummin.”
“I’m sure he must be doing something just the same. This is too important to ignore.”
“Has it occurred to you that he might be dead?”
“That’s a possibility but I don’t think so. If he was the news would reach me.”
“Here?”
“Even here.”
Seldon raised his eyebrows but said nothing.
Raych came back in the late afternoon happy and excited with descriptions of monkeys and of Bakarian demoires and he dominated the conversation during dinner.
It was not until after dinner when they were in their own quarters that Dors said “Now tell me what happened with Madam Mayor Raych.
 Tell me anything she did or said that you think we ought to know.”
“One thing ” said Raych his face lighting up. “That’s why she didn’t show at dinner I bet.”
“What was it?”
“The zoo was closed except for us you know. There were lots of us Rashelle and me and all sorts of guys in uniforms and dames in fancy clothes and like that.
 Then this guy in a uniform-a different guy who wasn’t there to begin with-came in toward the end and he said something in a low voice and Rashelle corned to all the people and made with her hand like they shouldn’
t move and they didn’t. And she went a little ways away with this new guy so she could talk to him and no one could hear her.
 Except I kept paying no attention and kept looking at the different cages and sort of moved near to Rashelle so I could hear her.
“She said ‘How dare they?’ like she was real mad. And the guy in the uniform he looked nervous-I just got quick looks because I was trying to make out like I was watching the animals-so mostly I just heard the words.
 He said somebody-I don’t remember the name but he was a general or somethin. He said this general said the officers had sworn religious to Rashelle’s old man“
“Sworn allegiance ” said Dors.
“Somethin’ like that and they was nervous about havin’ to do what a dame says. He said they wanted the old man or else if he was kind of sick he should pick some guy to be Mayor not a dame.”
“Not a dame? Are you sure?”
“That’s what he said. He like whispered it. He was so nervous and Rashelle was so mad she could hardly speak. She said ‘I’
ll have his head. They wilt all swear allegiance to me tomorrow and whoever refuses will lave cause to regret it before an hour has passed.
’ That’s exactly what she said. She broke up the whole party and we all came back and she didn’t say one word to me al!
 the rime. Just sat there looking kinda mean and angry.”
Dors said “Good. Don’t you mention this to anyone Raych.”
“Course not. Is it what you wanted?”
“Very much what I wanted. You did well Raych. Now go to your room and forget the whole thing. Don’t even think about it.”
Once he was gone Dors turned to Seldon and said “This is very interesting. Daughters have succeeded fathersor mothers for that matterand held Mayoralties or other high offices on any number of occasions.
 There have even been reigning Empresses as you undoubtedly know and I can’t recall that there was ever in Imperial history any serious question of serving under one.
 It makes one wonder why such a thing should now arise in Wye.”
Seldon said Why not? We’ve only recently been in Mycogen where women are held in a total lack of esteem and couldn’t possibly hold positions of power however minor.”
“Yes of course but that’s an exception. There are other places where women dominate. For the most part though government and power have been more or less equisexual.
 If more men tend to hold high positions it is usually because women tend to be more bound-biologically-to children.”
“But what is the situation in Wye?”
“Equisexual as far as I know. Rashelle didn’t hesitate to assume Mayoral power and I imagine old Mannix didn’t hesitate to grant it to her.
 And she was surprised and furious at encountering male dissent. She can’t have expected it.”
Seldon said “You’re clearly pleased at this. Why?”
“Simply because it’s so unnatural that it must be contrived and I imagine Hummin is doing the contriving.”
Seldon said thoughtfully “You think so?”
“I do ” said Dors.
“You know ” said Seldon “so do I.”
89.
It was their tenth day in Wye and in the morning Hari Seldon’s door signal sounded and Raych’s high-pitched voice outside was crying out “Mister! Mister Seldom It’s war!”
Seldon took a moment to swap from sleep to wakefulness and scrambled out of bed. He was shivering slightly (the Wyans liked their domiciles on the chilly side he had discovered quite early in his stay there) when he threw the door open.
Raych bounced in excited and wide-eyed. “Mister Seldon they have Mannix the old Mayor’. They have“
“Who have Raych?”
“The Imperials Their jets came in last night all over. The news holocasts are telling all about it. It’s on in Missus’s room.
 She said to let ya sleep but I figured ya would wanner know.”
“And you were quite right.” Seldom pausing only tong enough to throw on a bathrobe burst into Dors’s room. She was fully dressed and was watching the bolo-sec in the alcove.
Behind the clear small image of a desk sat a man with the Spaceship-and-Sun sharply defined on the left-front of his tunic. On either side two soldiers also wearing the Spaceship-and-Sun stood armed.
 The officer at the desk was saying “-is under the peaceful control of his Imperial Majesty. Mayor Mannix is safe and well and is in full possession of his Mayoral powers under the guidance of friendly Imperial troops.
 He will be before you soon to urge calm on all Wyans and to ask any Wyan soldiers still in arms to lay them down.”
There were other news holocasts by various newsmen with unemotional voices all wearing Imperial armbands. The news was all the same: surrender by this or that unit of the Wyan security forces after firing a few shots for the recordand sometimes after no resistance at all.
 This town center and that town center were occupiedand there were repeated views of Wyan crowds somberly watching Imperial forces marching down the streets.
Dors said “It was perfectly executed Hari. Surprise was complete. There was no chance of resistance and none of consequence was offered.”
Then Mayor Mannix IV appeared as had been promised. He was standing upright and perhaps for the sake of appearances there were no Imperials in sight though Seldon was reasonably certain that an adequate number were present just out of camera range.
Mannix was old but his strength though worn was still apparent. His eyes did not meet the holo-camera and his words were spoken as though forced upon him-but as had been promised they counseled Wyans to remain calm to offer no resistance to keep Wye from harm and to cooperate with the Emperor who it was hoped would survive long on the throne.
“No mention of Rashelle ” said Seldon. “It’s as though his daughter doesn’t exist.”
“No one has mentioned her ” said Dors “and this place which is after all her residenceor one of them-hasn’t been attacked. Even if she manages to slip away and take refuge in some neighboring sector I doubt she will be safe anywhere on Trantor for long.”
“Perhaps not ” came a voice; “but I’ll be safe here for a little while.”
Rashelle entered. She was properly dressed properly calm. She was even smiling but it was no smile of joy; it was rather a cold baring of teeth.
The three stared at her in surprise for a moment and Seldon wondered if she had any of her servants with her or if they had promptly deserted her at the first sign of adversity. 406
Dors said a little coldly “I see Madam Mayor that your hopes for a coup can not be maintained. Apparently you have been forestalled.”
“I have not been forestalled. I have been betrayed. My officers have been tampered with and-against all history and rationality — they have refused to fight for a woman but only for their old master.
 And traitors that they are they then let their old master be seized so that he cannot lead them in resistance.”
She looked about for a chair and sat down. “And now the Empire must continue to decay and die when I was prepared to offer it new life.”
“I think ” said Dors “the Empire has avoided an indefinite period of useless fighting and destruction. Console yourself with that Madam Mayor.”
It was as though Rashelle did not hear her. “So many years of preparation destroyed in a night.” She sat there beaten defeated and seemed to have aged twenty years.
Dors said “It could scarcely have been done in a night. The suborning of your officers-if that took place-must have taken time.”
“At that Demerzel is a master and quite obviously I underestimated him. How he did it I don’t know-threats bribes smooth and specious argument.
 He is a master at the art of stealth and betrayal-I should have known.”
She went on after a pause. “If this was outright force on his part I would have had no trouble destroying anything he sent against us.
 Who would think that Wye would be betrayed that an oath of allegiance would be so lightly thrown aside?”
Seldon said with automatic rationality “But I imagine the oath was made not to you but to your father.”
“Nonsense ” said Rashelle vigorously. “When my father gave me the Mayoral office as he was legally entitled to do he automatically passed on to me any oaths of allegiance made to him.
 There is ample precedence for this. It is customary to have the oath repeated to the new ruler but that is a ceremony only and not a legal requirement.
 My officers know that though they choose to forget. They use my womanhood as an excuse because they quake in fear of Imperial vengeance that would never have come had they been staunch or tremble with greed for promised rewards they will surely never get-if I know Demerzel.”
She turned sharply toward Seldon. “He wants you you know. Demerzel struck at us for you.”
Seldon started. “Why me?”
“Don’t be a fool. For the same reason I wanted you . . . to use you as a cool of course.” She sighed.
 “At least I am not utterly betrayed. There are still loyal soldiers to be found. -Sergeant!”
Sergeant Emmer Thalus entered with a soft cautious step that seemed incongruous considering his size. His uniform was spruce his long blond mustache fiercely curled.
“Madam Mayor ” he said drawing himself to attention with a snap.
He was still in appearance the side of beef that Hari had named him-a man still following orders blindly totally oblivious to the new and changed state of affairs.
Rashelle smiled sadly at Raych. “And how are you little Raych? I had meant to make something of you. It seems now I won’t be able to.”
“Hello Missus . . . Madam ” said Raych awkwardly.
“And to have made something of you too Dr. Seldom” said Rashelle “and there also I must crave pardon. I cannot.”
“For me Madam you need have no regrets.”
“But I do. I cannot very well let Demerzel have you. That would be one victory too many for him and at least I can stop that.”
“I would not work for him Madam I assure you any more than I would have worked for you.”
“It is not a matter of work. It is a matter of being used. Farewell Dr. Seldon. -Sergeant blast him.”
The sergeant drew his blaster at once and Dors with a loud cry lunged forwardbut Seldon reached out for her and caught her by the elbow. He hung on desperately.
“Stay hack Dors ” he shouted “or he’ll kill you. He won’t kill me. You too Raych. Stand back. Don’t move.”
Seldon faced the sergeant. “You hesitate Sergeant because you know you cannot shoot I might have killed you ten days ago but I did not.
 And you gave me your word of honor at that time that you would protect me.”
“What are you waiting for?” snapped Rashelle. “I said shoot him down Sergeant.”
Seldom said nothing more. He stood there while the sergeant eyes bulging held his blaster steady and pointed at Seldon’s head.
“You have your order!” shrieked Rashelle.
“I have your word ” said Seldon quietly.
And Sergeant Thalus said in a choked tone “Dishonored either way.” His hand fell and his blaster clanged to the floor.
Rashelle cried out “Then you too betray me’.”
Before Seldon could move or Dors free herself from his grip Rashelle seized the blaster turned it on the sergeant and closed contact.
Seldon had never seen anyone blasted before. Somehow from the name of the weapon perhaps he had expected a loud noise an explosion of flesh and blood.
 This Wyan blaster at least did nothing of the sort. What mangling it did to the organs inside the sergeant’s chest Seldon could not tell but without a change in expression without a wince of pain the sergeant crumbled and fell dead beyond any doubt or any hope.
And Rashelle turned the blaster on Seldon with a firmness that put to rest any hope for his own life beyond the next second.
It was Raych however who jumped into action the moment the sergeant fell. Racing between Seldon and Rashelle he waved his hands wildly.
“Missus Missus ” he called. “Don’t shoot.”
For a moment Rashelle looked confused. “Out of the way Raych. I don’t want to hurt you.”
That moment of hesitation was all Dors needed. Breaking loose violently she plunged toward Rashelle with a long low dive. Rashelle went down with a cry and the blaster hit the ground a second time.
Raych retrieved it.
Seldon with a deep and shuddering breath said “Raych give that to me.”
But Raych backed away. “Ya ain’t gonna kill her are ya Mister Seldon? She was nice to me.”
“I won’t kill anyone Raych ” said Seldon. “She killed the sergeant and would have killed me but she didn’t shoot rather than hurt you and we’ll let her live for that.”
It was Seldon who now sat down the blaster held loosely in his hand white Dors removed the neuronic whip from the dead sergeant’s other holster.
A new voice rang out. “I’ll take care of her now Seldon.”
Seldon looked up and in sudden joy said “Hummin! Finally!”
“I’m sorry it took so long Seldon. I had a lot to do. How are you Dr. Venabili? I take it this is Mannix’
s daughter Rashelle. But who is the boy?”
“Raych is a young Dahlite friend of ours ” said Seldon.
Soldiers were entering and at a small gesture from Hummin they lifted Rashelle respectfully.
Dors able to suspend her intent surveillance of the other woman brushed at her clothes with her hands and smoothed her blouse. Seldon suddenly realized that he was still in his bathrobe.
Rashelle shaking herself loose from the soldiers with contempt pointed to Hummin and said to Seldon “Who is this?”
Seldon said “It is Chetter Hummin a friend of mine and my protector on this planet.”
“Your protector.” Rashelle laughed madly. “You fool! You idiot! That man is Demerzel and if you look at your Venabili woman you will see from her face that she is perfectly aware of that.
 You have been trapped all along far worse than ever you were with me!”
90.
Hummin and Seldon sat at lunch that day quite alone a pall of quiet between them for the most part. It was toward the end of the meal that Seldon stirred and said in a lively voice “Well sir how do I address you?
 I think of you as ‘Chetter Hummin’ still but even if I accept you in your other persona I surely cannot address you as ‘Eto Demerzel.
’ In that capacity you have a title and I don’t know the proper usage. Instruct me.”
The other said gravely “Call me Hummin’-if you don’t mind. Or ‘Chetter.’ Yes I am Eto Demerzel but with respect to you I am Hummin.
 As a matter of fact the two are not distinct. I told you that the Empire is decaying and failing. I believe that to be true in both my capacities.
 I told you that I wanted psychohistory as a way of preventing that decay and failure or of bringing about a renewal and reinvigoration if the decay and failure must run its course.
 I believe that in both my capacities too.”
“But you had me in your grip-I presume you were in the vicinity when I Gad my meeting with His Imperial Majesty.”
“With Cleon. Yes of course.”
“And you might have spoken to me then exactly as you later did as Hummin.”
“And accomplished what? As Demerzel I have enormous tasks. I have to handle Cleon a well-meaning but not very capable ruler and prevent him insofar as I can from making mistakes.
 I have to do my bit in governing Trantor and the Empire coo. And as you see I had to spend a great deal of time in preventing Wye from doing harm.”
“Yes I know ” murmured Seldon.
“It wasn’t easy and I nearly lost out. I have spent years sparring carefully with Mannix learning to understand his chinking and planning a countermove to his every move.
 I did not think at any time that while he was still alive he would pass on his powers to his daughter. I had not studied her and I was not prepared for her utter lack of caution.
 Unlike her father she has been brought up to take power for granted and had no clear idea of its limitations. So she got you and forced me to act before I was quite ready.”
“You almost lost me as a result. I faced the muzzle of a blaster twice.’.
“I know ” said Hummin nodding. “And we might have lost you Upperside coo-another accident I could not foresee.”
“But you haven’t really answered my question. Why did you send me chasing all over the face of Trantor to escape from Demerzel when you yourself were Demerzel?”
“You told Cleon that psychohistory was a purely theoretical concept a kind of mathematical game that made no practical sense. That might indeed have been so but if I approached you officially I was sure you would merely have maintained your belief.
 Yet I was attracted to the notion of psychohistory. I wondered whether it might not be after all just a game. You must understand that I didn’
t want merely to use you I wanted a real and practical psychohistory.
“So I sent you as you put it chasing all over the face of Trantor with the dreaded Demerzel close on your heels at all times.
 That I felt would concentrate your mind powerfully. It would make psychohistory something exciting and much more than a mathematical game. You would try to work it our for the sincere idealist Hummin where you would not for the Imperial flunky Demerzel.
 Also you would get a glimpse of various sides of Trantor and that too would be helpful-certainly more helpful than living in an ivory tower on a far-off planet surrounded entirely by fellow mathematicians.
 Was I right? Have you made progress?”
Seldon said “In psychohistory? Yes I did Hummin. I thought you knew.”
“How should I know?”
“I told Dors.”
“But you hadn’t told me. Nevertheless you tell me so now. That is good news.”
“Not entirely ” said Seldon. “I have made only the barest beginning. But it is a beginning.”
“Is it the kind of beginning that can be explained to a nonmathematician?”
“I think so. You see Hummin from the start I have seen psychohistory as a science that depends on the interaction of twentyfive million worlds each with an average population of four thousand million.
 It’s too much. There’s no way of handling something that complex. If d was to succeed at all if there was to be any way of finding a useful psychohistory I would first have to find a simpler system.
“So I thought I would go back in time and deal with a single world a world that was the only one occupied by humanity in the dim age before the colonization of the Galaxy.
 In Mycogen they spoke of an original world of Aurora and in Dahl I heard word of an original world of Earth. I thought they might be the same world under different names but they were sufficiently different in one key point at least to make that impossible.
 And it didn’t matter. So little was known of either one and that little so obscured by myth and legend that there was no hope of making use of psychohistory in connection with them.”
He paused to sip at his cold juice keeping his eyes firmly on Hummin’s face.
Hummin said “Well? What then?”
“Meanwhile Dors had told me something I call the hand-on-thigh story. It was of no innate significance merely a humorous and entirely trivial tale.
 As a result though Dors mentioned the different sex mores on various worlds and in various sectors of Trantor. It occurred to me that she treated the different Trantorian sectors as though they were separate worlds.
 I thought idly that instead of twenty-five million different worlds I had twenty-five million plus eight hundred to deal with. It seemed a trivial difference so I forgot it and thought no more about it.
“But as I traveled from the Imperial Sector to Streeling to Mycogen to Dahl to Wye I observed for myself how different each was. The thought of Trantor-not as a world but as a complex of worlds-grew stronger but still I didn’t see the crucial point.
“It was only when I listened to Rashelleyou see it was good that I was finally captured by Wye and it was good that Rashelle’
s rashness drove her into the grandiose schemes that she imparted to me-When I listened to Rashelle as I said she told me that all she wanted was Trantor and some immediately adjacent worlds.
 It was an Empire in itself she said and dismissed the outer worlds as ‘distant nothings.’
“It was then that in a moment I saw what I must have been harboring in my hidden thoughts for a considerable time. On the one hand Trantor possessed an extraordinarily complex social system being a populous world made up of eight hundred smaller worlds.
 It was in itself a system complex enough to make psychohistory meaningful and yet it was simple enough compared to the Empire as a whole to make psychohistory perhaps practical.
“And the Outer Worlds the twenty-five million of them? They were ‘distant nothings.’ Of course they affected Trantor and were affected by Trantor but these were second-order effects.
 If I could make psychohistory work as a first approximation for Trantor alone then the minor effects of the Outer Worlds could be added as later modifications.
 Do you see what I mean? I was searching for a single world on which to establish a practical science of psychohistory and I was searching for it in the far past when all the time the single world I wanted was under my feet now “
Hummin said with obvious relief and pleasure “Wonderful!”
“But it’s all left to do Hummin. I must study Trantor in sufficient detail. I must devise the necessary mathematics to deal with it.
 If I am lucky and live out a full lifetime I may have the answers before I die. If not my successors will have to follow me.
 Conceivably the Empire may have fallen and splintered before psychohistory becomes a useful technique.”
“I will do everything I can to help you.”
“I know it ” said Seldon.
“You trust me then despite the fact I am Demerzel?”
“Entirely. Absolutely. But I do so because you are not Demerzel.”
“But I am ” insisted Hummin.
“But you are not. Your persona as Demerzel is as far removed from the truth as is your persona as Hummin.”
“What do you mean?” Hummin’s eyes grew wide and he backed away slightly from Seldon.
“I mean that you probably chose the name ‘Hummin’ out of a wry sense of what was fitting. ‘Hummin’ is a mispronunciation of ‘human ‘ isn’t it?”
Hummin made no response. He continued to stare at Seldon.
And finally Seldon said “Because you’re not human are you ‘HumminDemerzel’? You’re a robot.”
Dors
SELDON HARI- . . . It is customary to think of Hari Seldon only in connection with psychohistory to see him only as mathematics and social change personified.
 There is no doubt that he himself encouraged this for at no time in his formal writings did he give any hint as to how he came to solve the various problems of psychohistory.
 His leaps of thought might have all been plucked from air for all he tells us. Nor does he tell us of the blind alleys into which he crept or the wrong turnings he may have made .
. . . As for his private life it is a blank. Concerning his parents and siblings we know a handful of factors no more.
 His only son Raych Seldon is known to have been adopted but how that came about is not known. Concerning his wife we only know that she existed.
 Clearly Seldon wanted to be a cipher except where psychohistory was concerned. It is as though he feltor wanted it to be felt-that he did not live he merely psychohistorified.
ENCYCLOPEDIA GALACTICA
91.
Hummin sat calmly not a muscle twitching still looking at Hari Seldon and Seldon for his part waited. It was Hummin he thought who should speak next.
Hummin did but said merely “A robot? Me? -By robot I presume you mean an artificial being such as the object you saw in the Sacratorium in Mycogen.”
“Not quite like that ” said Seldon.
“Not metal? Not burnished? Not a lifeless simulacrum?” Hummin said it without any evidence of amusement.
“No. To be of artificial life is not necessarily to be made of metal. I speak of a robot indistinguishable from a human being in appearance.’.
“If indistinguishable Hari then how do you distinguish?”
“Not by appearance. “
“Explain.”
“Hummin in the course of my flight from yourself as Demerzel I heard of two ancient worlds as I told you-Aurora and Earth. Each seemed to be spoken of as a first world or an only world.
 In both cases robots were spoken of but with a difference.”
Seldon was staring thoughtfully at the man across the table wondering if in any way he would give some sign that he was less than a manor more.
 He said “Where Aurora was in question one robot was spoken of as a renegade a traitor someone who deserted the cause. Where Earth was in question one robot was spoken of as a hero one who represented salvation.
 Was it too much to suppose that it was the same robot?”
“Was it?” murmured Hummin.
“This is what I thought Hummin. I thought that Earth and Aurora were two separate worlds co-existing in time. I don’t know which one preceded the other.
 From the arrogance and the conscious sense of superiority of the Mycogenians I might suppose that Aurora was the original world and that they despised the Earthmen who derived from themor who degenerated from them.
“On the other hand Mother Rittah who spoke to me of Earth was convinced that Earth was the original home of humanity and certainly the tiny and isolated position of the Mycogenians in a whole galaxy of quadrillions of people who lack the strange Mycogenian ethos might mean that Earth was indeed the original home and that Aurora was the aberrant offshoot.
 I cannot tell but I pass on to you my thinking so that you will understand my final conclusions.”
Hummin nodded. “I see what you are doing. Please continue.”
“The worlds were enemies. Mother Rittah certainly made it sound so. When I compare the Mycogenians who seem to embody Aurora and the Dahlites who seem to embody Earth I imagine that Aurora whether first or second was nevertheless the one that was more advanced the one that could produce more elaborate robots even ones indistinguishable from human beings in appearance.
 Such a robot was designed and devised in Aurora then. But he was a renegade so he deserted Aurora. To the Earthpeople he was a hero so he must have joined Earth.
 Why he did this what his motives were I can’t say.”
Hummin said “Surely you mean why it did this what its motives were.”
“Perhaps but with you sitting across from me ” said Seldon “I find it difficult to use the inanimate pronoun. Mother Rittah was convinced that the heroic robot-her heroic robot-still existed that he would return when he was needed.
 It seemed to me that there was nothing impossible in the thought of an immortal robot or at least one who was immortal as long as the replacement of worn-out parts was not neglected.”
“Even the brain?” asked Hummin.
“Even the brain. I don’t really know anything about robots but I imagine a new brain could be re-recorded from the old. and Mother Rittah hinted of strange mental powers.
 -I thought: It must be so. I may in some ways be a romantic but I am not so much a romantic as to think that one robot by switching from one side to the other can alter the course of history.
 A robot could not make Earth’s victory sure nor Aurora’s defeat certain-unless there was something strange something peculiar about the robot.”
Hummin said “Does it occur to you Hari that you are dealing with legends legends that may have been distorted over the centuries and the millennia even to the extent of building a veil of the supernatural over quire ordinary events?
 Can you make yourself believe in a robot that not only seems human but that also lives forever and has mental powers? Are you not beginning to believe in the superhuman?”
“I know very well what legends are and I am not one to be taken in by them and made to believe in fairy tales.
 Still when they are supported by certain odd events that I have seenand even experienced myself“
“Such as?”
“Hummin I met you and trusted you from the start. Yes you helped me against those two hoodlums when you didn’t need to and that predisposed me in your favor since I didn’
t realize at the time that they were your hirelings doing what you had instructed them to do. but never mind that.”
“No ” said Hummin a hint of amusement-finally-in his voice.
“I trusted you. I was easily convinced not to go home to Helicon and to make myself a wanderer over the face of Trantor. I believed everything you told me without question.
 I placed myself entirely in your hands. Looking back on it now I see myself as not myself. I am not a person to be so easily led yet I was.
 More than that I did not even think it strange that I was behaving so far out of character.”
“You know yourself best Hari “
“It wasn’t only me. How is it that Dors Venabili a beautiful woman with a career of her own should abandon that career in order to join me in my flight?
 How is it that she should risk her life to save mine seeming to take on as a kind of holy duty the cask of protecting me and becoming single-minded in the process?
 Was it simply because you asked her to?”
“I did ask her to Hari.”
“Yet she does not strike me as the kind of person to make such a radical changeover in her life merely because someone asks her to.
 Nor could I believe it was because she had fallen madly in love with me at first sight and could not help herself. I somehow wish she had but she seems quite the mistress of her emotional self more-I am now speaking to you frankly-than I myself am with respect to her.”
“She is a wonderful woman ” said Hummin. “I don’t blame you.”
Seldon went on. “How is it moreover that Sunmaster Fourteen a monster of arrogance and one who leads a people who are themselves stiff-necked in their own conceit should be willing to take in tribespeople like Dors and myself and to treat us as well as the Mycogenians could and did?
 When we broke every rule committed every sacrilege how is it that you could still talk him into letting us go?
“How could you talk the Tisalvers with their petty prejudices into taking us in? How can you be at home everywhere in the world be friends with everyone influence each person regardless of their individual peculiarities?
 For that matter how do you manage to manipulate Cleon too? And if he is viewed as malleable and easily molded then how were you able to handle his father who by all accounts was a rough and arbitrary tyrant? How could you do all this?
“Most of all how is it that Mannix IV of Wye could spend decades building an army without peer one trained to be proficient in every detail and yet have it fall apart when his daughter tries to make use of it?
 How could you persuade them to play the Renegade all of them as you have done?”
Hummin said “Might this mean no more than that I am a tactful person used to dealing with people of different types that I am in a position to have done favors for crucial people and am in a position to do additional favors in the future?
 Nothing I have done it might seem requires the supernatural.”
“Nothing you have done? Not even the neutralization of the Wyan army?”
“They did not wish to serve a woman.”
“They must have known for years that any time Mannix laid down his powers or any time he died Rashelle would be their Mayor yet they showed no signs of discontent-until you felt it necessary that they show it.
 Dors described you at one time as a very persuasive man. And so you are. More persuasive than any man could be. But you are not more persuasive than an immortal robot with strange mental powers might be. -Well Hummin?”
Hummin said “What is it you expect of me Hari? Do you expect me to admit I’m a robot? That I only look like a human being?
 That I am immortal? That I am a mental marvel?!”
Seldon leaned toward Hummin as he sat there on the opposite side of the table. “Yes Hummin I do. I expect you to tell me the truth and I strongly suspect that what you have just outlined is the truth.
 You Hummin are the robot that Mother Rittah referred to as DaNee friend of Ba-Lee. You must admit it. You have no choice.”
92.
It was as though they were sitting in a tiny Universe of their own. There in the middle of Wye with the Wyan army being disarmed by Imperial force they sat quietly.
 There in the midst of events that all of Trantor and perhaps all the Galaxy-was watching there was this small bubble of utter isolation within which Seldon and Hummin were playing their game of attack and defense-Seldon trying hard to force a new reality Hummin making no move to accept that new reality.
Seldon had no fear of interruption. He was certain that the bubble within which they sat had a boundary that could not be penetrated that Hummin’
s-no the robot’s-powers would keep all at a distance rill the game was over.
Hummin finally said “You are an ingenious fellow Hari but I fail to see why I must admit that I am a robot and why I have no choice but to do so.
 Everything you say may be true as facts-your own behavior Dors’s behavior Sunmaster’s Tisalver’s the Wyan generals’-all all may have happened as you said but that doesn’
t force your interpretation of the meaning of the events to be true. Surely everything that happened can have a natural explanation. You trusted me because you accepted what I said;
 Dors felt your safety to be important because she felt psychohistory to be crucial herself being a historian; Sunmaster and Tisalver were beholden to me for favors you know nothing of the Wyan generals resented being ruled by a woman no more.
 Why must we flee to the supernatural?”
Seldon said “See here Hummin do you really believe the Empire to be falling and do you really consider it important that it not be allowed to do so with no move made to save it or at the least cushion its fall?”
“I really do.” Somehow Seldon knew this statement was sincere. “And you really want me to work out the details of psychohistory and you feel that you yourself cannot do it?”
“I lack the capability.”
“And you feel that only I can handle psychohistory-even if I sometimes doubt it myself?”
“Yes.”
“And you must therefore feel that if you can possibly help me in any way you must.”
“I do.”
“Personal feelings-selfish considerations-could play no part?”
A faint and brief smile passed over Hummin’s grave face and for a moment Seldon sensed a vast and arid desert of weariness behind Hummin’
s quiet manner. “I have built a long career on paying no heed to personal feelings or to selfish considerations.”
“Then I ask your help. I can work out psychohistory on the basis of Trantor alone but I will run into difficulties. Those difficulties I may overcome but how much easier it would be to do so if I knew certain key facts.
 For instance was Earth or Aurora the first world of humanity or was it some other world altogether? What was the relationship between Earth and Aurora?
 Did either or both colonize the Galaxy? If one why didn’t the other? If both how was the issue decided? Are there worlds descended from both or from only one?
 How did robots come to be abandoned? How did Trantor become the Imperial world rather than another planet? What happened to Aurora and Earth in the meantime?
 There are a thousand questions I might ask right now and a hundred thousand that might arise as I go along. Would you allow me to remain ignorant Hummin and fail in my task when you could inform me and help me succeed?”
Hummin said “If I were the robot would I have room in my brain for all of twenty thousand years of history for millions of different worlds?”
“I don’t know the capacity of robotic brains. I don’t know the capacity of yours. But if you lack the capacity then you must have that information which you cannot hold safely recorded in a place and in a way that would make it possible for you to call upon it.
 And if you have it and I need information how can you deny and withhold it from me? And if you cannot withhold it from me how can you deny that you are a robot-that robot the Renegade?”
Seldon sat back and took a deep breath. “So I ask you again: Are you that robot? If you want psychohistory then you must admit it.
 If you still deny you are a robot and if you convince me you are not then my chances at psychohistory become much much smaller.
 It is up to you then. Are you a robot? Are you Da-Nee?”
And Hummin said as imperturbable as ever. “Your arguments are irrefutable. I am R. Daneel Olivaw. The R’ stands for ‘robot.’ “
93.
R. Daneel Olivaw still spoke quietly but it seemed to Seldon that there was a subtle change in his voice as though he spoke more easily now that he was no longer playing a part.
“In twenty thousand years ” said Daneel “no one has guessed I was a robot when it was not my intention to have him or her know.
 In part that was because human beings abandoned robots so long ago that very few remember that they even existed at one time. And in part it is because I do have the ability to detect and affect human emotion.
 The detection offers no trouble but to affect emotion is difficult for me for reasons having to do with my robotic nature-although I can do it when I wish.
 I have the ability but must deal with my will not to use it. I try never to interfere except when I have no choice but to do so.
 And when I do interfere it is rarely that I do more than strengthen as little as I can what is already there. If I can achieve my purposes without doing even so much I avoid it.
“It was not necessary to tamper with Sunmaster Fourteen in order to have him accept you-I call it ‘tampering ‘ you notice because it is not a pleasant thing to do.
 I did not have to tamper with him because he did owe me for favors rendered and he is an honorable man despite the peculiarities you found in him.
 I did interfere the second time when you had committed sacrilege in his eyes but it took very little. He was not anxious to hand you over to the Imperial authorities whom he does not like.
 I merely strengthened the dislike a trifle and he handed you over to my care accepting the arguments I offered which otherwise he might have considered specious.
“Nor did I tamper with you noticeably. You distrusted the Imperials too. Most human beings do these days which is an important factor in the decay and deterioration of the Empire.
 What’s more you were proud of psychohistory as a concept proud of having thought of it. You would not have minded having it prove to be a practical discipline.
 That would have further fed your pride.”
Seldon frowned and said “Pardon me Master Robot but I am not aware that I am quite such a monster of pride.”
Daneel said mildly “You are not a monster of pride at all. You are perfectly aware that is neither admirable nor useful to be driven by pride so you try to subdue that drive but you might as well disapprove of having yourself powered by your heartbeat.
 You cannot help either fact. Though you hide your pride from yourself for the sake of your own peace of mind you cannot hide it from me.
 It is there however carefully you mask it over. And I had but to strengthen it a touch and you were at once willing to take measures to hide from Demerzel measures that a moment before you would have resisted.
 And you were eager to work at psychohistory with an intensity that a moment before you would have scorned.
“I saw no necessity to touch anything else and so you have reasoned out your robothood. Had I foreseen the possibility of that I might have stopped it but my foresight and my abilities are not infinite.
 Nor am I sorry now that I failed for your arguments are good ones and it is important that you know who I am and that I use what I am to help you.
“Emotions my dear Seldom are a powerful engine of human action far more powerful than human beings themselves realize and you cannot know how much can be dome with the merest touch and how reluctant I am to do it.”
Seldon was breathing heavily trying to see himself as a man driven by pride and not liking it. “Why reluctant?”
“Because it would be so easy to overdo. I had to stop Rashelle from converting the Empire into a feudal anarchy. I might have bent minds quickly and the result might well have been a bloody uprising.
 Men are menand the Wyan generals are almost all men. It does not actually take much to rouse resentment and latent fear of women in any man.
 It may be a biological matter that I as a robot cannot fully understand.
“I had but to strengthen the feeling to produce a breakdown in her plans. If I had done it the merest millimeter too much I would have lost what I wanted-a bloodless takeover.
 I wanted nothing more than to have them not resist when my soldiers arrived.”
Daneel paused as though trying to pick his words then said “I do not wish to go into the mathematics of my positronic brain. It is more than I can understand though perhaps not more than you can if you give it enough thought.
 However I am governed by the Three Laws of Robotics that are traditionally put into wordsor once were long ago. They are these:
“‘One. A robot may not injure a human being or through inaction allow a human being to come to harm.
” Two. A robot must obey the orders given it by human beings except where such orders would conflict with the First Law.
” ‘Three. A robot must protect its own existence as long as such protection does not conflict with the First or Second Law.’
“But I had a . . . a friend twenty thousand years ago. Another robot. Not like myself. He could not be mistaken for a human being but it was he who had the mental powers and it was through him that I gained mine.
“It seemed to him that there should be a still more general rule than any of the Three Laws. He called it the Zeroth Law since zero comes before one. It is:
“‘Zero. A robot may not injure humanity or through inaction allow humanity to come to harm.’
“Then the First Law must read:
” One. A robot may not injure a human being or through inaction allow a human being to come to harm except where that would conflict with the Zeroth Law.’
“And the other laws must be similarly modified. Do you understand?”
Daneel paused earnestly and Seldon said “I understand.”
Daneel went on. “The trouble is Hari that a human being is easy to identify. I can point to one. It is easy to see what will harm a human being and what won’
t-relatively easy at least. But what is humanity? To what can we point when we speak of humanity? And how can we define harm to humanity?
 When will a course of action do more good than harm to humanity as a whole and how can one tell? The robot who first advanced the Zeroth law died-became permanently inactive-because he was forced into an action that he felt would save humanity yet which he could not be cure would save humanity.
 And as he became inactivated he left the care of the Galaxy to me.
“Since then I have cried. I have interfered as little as possible relying on human beings themselves to judge what was for the good. They could gamble;
 I could not. They could miss their goals; I did not dare. They could do harm unwittingly; I would grow inactive if I did.
 The Zeroth Law makes no allowance for unwitting harm.
“But at times I am forced to take action. That I am still functioning shows that my actions have been moderate and discreet. However as the Empire began to fail and to decline I have had to interfere more frequently and for decades now I have had to play the role of Demerzel trying to run the government in such a way as to stave off ruinand yet I will function you see.
“When you made your speech to the Decennial Convention I realized at once that in psychohistory there was a tool that might make it possible to identify what was good and bad for humanity.
 With it the decisions we would make would be less blind. I would even trust to human beings to make those decisions and again reserve myself only for the greatest emergencies.
 So I arranged quickly to have Cleon learn of your speech and call you in. Then when I heard your denial of the worth of psychohistory I was forced to think of some way to make you try anyway. Do you understand Hari?”
More than a little daunted Seldon said “I understand Hummin.”
“To you I must remain Hummin on those rare occasions when I will be able to see you. I will give you what information I have if it is something you need and in my persona as Demerzel I will protect you as much as I can.
 As Daneel you must never speak of me.”
“I wouldn’t want to ” said Seldon hurriedly. “Since I need your help it would ruin matters to have your plans impeded.”
“Yes I know you wouldn’t want to.” Daneel smiled wearily. “After all you are vain enough to want full credit for psychohistory.
 You would not want anyone to know-ever-that you needed the help of a robot.”
Seldon flushed. “I am not“
“But you are even if you carefully hide it from yourself. And it is important for I am strengthening that emotion within you minimally so that you will never be able to speak of me to others.
 It will not even occur to you that you might do so.”
Seldon said “I suspect Dors knows“
“She knows of me. And she too cannot speak of me to others. Now that you both know of my nature you can speak of me to each other freely but not to anyone else.”
Daneel rose. -Hari I have my work to do now. Before long you and Dors will be taken back to the Imperial Sector“
“The boy Raych must come with me. I cannot abandon him. And there is a young Dahlite named Yugo Amaryl“
“I understand. Raych will be taken too and you can do with any friend as you will. You will all be taken care of appropriately.
 And you will work on psychohistory. You will have a staff. You will have the necessary computers and reference material. I will interfere as little as possible and if there is resistance to your views that does not actually reach the point of endangering the mission then you will have to deal with it yourself.”
“Wait Hummin ” said Seldon urgently. “What if despite all your help and all my endeavors it turns out that psychohistory cannot be made into a practical device after all? What if I fail?”
Daneel rose. “In that case I have a second plan in hand. One I have been working on a long time on a separate world in a separate way.
 It too is very difficult and to some ways even more radical than psychohistory. It may fail too but there is a greater chance of success if two roads are open than if either one alone was.
“Take my advice Hari! If the time comes when you are able to set up some device that may act to prevent the worst from happening see if you can think of two devices so that if one fails the other will carry on.
 The Empire must be steadied or rebuilt on a new foundation. Let there be two such rather than one if that is possible.”
He rose “Now I must return to my ordinary work and you must turn to yours. You will be taken care of.”
With one final nod he rose and left.
Seldon looked after him and said softly “First I must speak to Dors.”
94.
Dors said “The palace is cleared. Rashelle will not be physically harmed. And you’ll return to the Imperial Sector Hari.”
“And you Dors?” said Seldon in a low tight voice.
“I presume I will go back to the University ” she said. “My work is being neglected my classes abandoned.”
“No Dors you have a greater cask.”
“What is that?”
“Psychohistory. I cannot tackle the project without you.”
“Of course you can. I am a total illiterate in mathematics.”
“And I in historyand we need both.”
Dors laughed. “I suspect that as a mathematician you are one of a kind. I as a historian am merely adequate certainly not outstanding.
 You will find any number of historians who will suit the needs of psychohistory better than I do.”
“In that case Dors let me explain that psychohistory needs more than a mathematician and a historian. It also needs the will to tackle what will probably be a lifetime problem.
 Without you Dors I will not have that will.”
“Of course you’ll have it.”
“Dors if you’re not with me I don’t intend to have it.”
Dors looked at Seldon thoughtfully. “This is a fruitless discussion Hari. Undoubtedly Hummin will make the decision. If he sends me hack to the University
“He won’t.”
“How can you be sure?”
“Because I’ll put it to him plainly. If he sends you back to the University I’ll go back to Helicon and the Empire can go ahead and destroy itself.”
“You can’t mean it.”
“But I certainly do.”
“Don’t you realize that Hummin can arrange to have your feelings change so that you will work on psychohistoryeven without me?”
Seldon shook his head. “Hummin will not make such an arbitrary decision. I’ve spoken to him. He dares not do much to the human mind because he is bound by what he calls the Laws of Robotics.
 To change my mind to the point where I will not want you with me Dors would mean a change of the kind he can not risk.
 On the other hand if he leaves me alone and if you join me in the project he will have what he wants-a true chance at psychohistory.
 Why should he not settle for that?”
Dors shook her head. “He may not agree for reasons of his own.’.
“Why should he disagree? You were asked to protect me Dors. Has Hummin cancelled that request?”
“No.”
“Then he wants you to continue your protection. And I want your protection.”
“Against what? You now have Hummin’s protection both as Demerzel and as Daneel and surely that is all you need.”
“If I had the protection of every person and every force in the Galaxy it would still be yours I would want.”
“Then you don’t want me for psychohistory. You want me for protection.”
Seldon scowled. “No! Why are you twisting my words? Why are you forcing me to say what you must know? It is neither psychohistory nor protection I want you for.
 Those are excuses and I’ll use any other I need. I want you-just you. And if you want the real reason it is because you are you.”
“You don’t even know me.”
“That doesn’t matter. I don’t care. and yet I do know you in a way. Better than you think.”
“Do you indeed?”
“Of course. You follow orders and you risk your life for without hesitation and with no apparent care for the consequences You learned how to play tennis so quickly.
 You learned how to use knives even more quickly and you handled yourself perfectly in the fight with Marron. Inhumanly -if I may say so.
 Your muscles are amazingly strong and your reaction time is amazingly fast. You can somehow tell when a room is being eavesdropped and you can be in touch with Hummin in some way that does not involve instrumentation.”
Dors said “And what do you think of all that?”
“It has occurred to me that Hummin in his persona as R. Daneel Olivaw has an impossible task. How can one robot try to guide the Empire? He must have helpers.”
“That is obvious. Millions I should imagine. I am a helper. You are a helper. Little Raych is a helper.”
“You are a different kind of helper.”
“In what way? Hari say it. If you hear yourself say it you will realize how crazy it is.”
Seldon looked long at her and then said in a low voice “I will not say it because . . . I don’t care. “
“You really don’t? You wish to take me as I am?”
“I will take you as I must. You are Dors and whatever else you are in all the world I want nothing else.”
Dors said softly “Hari I want what is good for you because of what I am but I feel that if I wasn’t what I am I would still want what is good for you.
 And I don’t think I am good for you.”
“Good for me or bad I don’t care.” Here Hari looked down as he paced a few steps weighing what he would say next. “Dors have you ever been kissed?”
“Of course Hari. It’s a social part of life and I live socially.”
“No no! I mean have you ever really kissed a man? You know passionately?”
“Well yes Hari I have.”
“Did you enjoy it?”
Dors hesitated. She said “When I’ve kissed in that way I enjoyed it more than I would have enjoyed disappointing a young man I liked someone whose friendship meant something to me.
” At this point Dors blushed and she turned her face away. “Please Hari this is difficult for me to explain.”
But Hari more determined now than ever pressed further. “So you kissed for the wrong reasons then to avoid hurt feelings.”
“Perhaps everyone does in a sense.”
Seldon mulled this over then said suddenly “Did you ever ask to be kissed?”
Dors paused as though looking back on her life. “No.”
“Or wish to be kissed again once you had?”
“No.”
“Have you ever slept with a man?” he asked softly desperately.
“Of course. I told you. These things are a part of life.”
Hari gripped her shoulders as if he was going to shake her. “But have you ever felt the desire a need for that kind of closeness with just one special person? Dors have you ever felt love.”
Dors looked up slowly almost sadly and locked eyes with Seldon. “I’m sorry Hari but no.”
Seldon released her letting his arms fall dejectedly to his sides.
Then Dors placed her hand gently on his arm and said “So you see Hari. I’m not really what you want.”
Seldon’s head drooped and he stared at the floor. He weighed the matter and tried to think rationally. Then he gave up. He wanted what he wanted and he wanted it beyond thought and beyond rationality.
He looked up. “Dors dear even so I don’t care.”
Seldon put his arms around her and brought his head close to hers slowly as though waiting for her to pull away all the while drawing her nearer.
Dors made no move and he kissed her-slowly lingeringly and then passionatelyand her arms suddenly tightened around him.
When he stopped at last she looked at him with eyes that mirrored her smile and she said:
“Kiss me again Hari -Please.”
 End 